       U NIVERSITÀ DEGLI S TUDI DI P ISA
             F ACOLTÀ DI I NGEGNERIA
C ORSO DI L AUREA IN I NGEGNERIA I NFORMATICA



                 T ESI DI L AUREA


      D IFF S ERV SIMULATIONS USING THE
             N ETWORK S IMULATOR :
   REQUIREMENTS , ISSUES AND SOLUTIONS




                      C ANDIDATO
                S ERGIO A NDREOZZI



R ELATORI
P ROFESSOR L UCIANO L ENZINI
P ROFESSOR L UIGI R IZZO
P ROFESSOR J ARI P ORRAS
M.S C . K ARI H EIKKINEN


            A NNO A CCADEMICO 2000/2001
ABSTRACT
Author                Sergio Andreozzi
Title                 DiffServ simulations using the Network Simulator:
                      requirements, issues and solutions
Year                  2001

Master’s Thesis       116 pages, 46 figures, 10 tables and 3 appendices

Supervisors           Professor Luciano Lenzini
                      Professor Luigi Rizzo
                      Professor Jari Porras
                      M. Sc. Kari Heikkinen

Keywords              DiffServ, QoS, simulation, Network Simulator



IP networks are destined to become the ubiquitous global communication
infrastructure. An increasing number of different applications are continually
conveyed by them causing a fragmentation of performance and service
requirements. Continuous efforts have been made to develop a number of new
technologies for enhancing Quality of Service capabilities. The DiffServ
Architecture is the traffic management scheme defined by IETF to provide scalable
services differentiation on the Internet.

This thesis work aims to explore and to improve the simulations capabilities of the
Network Simulator (NS), in addition the traffic management skills of that new
architecture are evaluated. The main focus is on the versatility of building complete
service models and on providing a wide range of performance parameters.

Key contributions reached during this work are: firstly, an improved simulation
module with a wider set of mechanisms, a better versatility of services definition
and an extended set of performance parameters. Secondly, valuable test beds for
mechanisms testing are set. In particular, a complete service model with a Premium
Service targeted for conversational applications like Voice over IP, an Olympic
Services sub-model targeted for relative services differentiation and a Best Effort
Service for backward compatibility is configured, relative traffic generators are set
and performance parameters are monitored.


                                         ii
SOMMARIO
Autore              Sergio Andreozzi
Titolo              Simulazioni dell’architettura DiffServ con l’ausilio del
                    Network Simulator: requisiti, problematiche e soluzioni
Anno                2001
Luogo               Lappeenranta

Tesi di Laurea      116 pagine, 46 figure, 10 tabelle e 3 appendici

Relatori            Professor Luciano Lenzini
                    Professor Luigi Rizzo
                    Professor Jari Porras
                    M. Sc. Kari Heikkinen

Parole chiave       DiffServ, QoS, simulazione, Network Simulator



Le reti basate sul protocollo IP stanno evolvendo verso una infrastruttura di
comunicazione globale dove un sempre crescente numero di applicazioni viene
veicolato. Questa evoluzione sta causando una frammentazione dei servizi e delle
prestazioni richieste alle reti stesse. Sforzi vengono continuamente fatti per
migliorarne la capacità di fornire la Qualità del Servizio desiderata. In questo
contesto, l’architettura DiffServ si inserisce come un nuovo schema di gestione del
traffico di rete definito dall’IETF allo scopo di realizzare una differenziazione dei
servizi scalabile all’interno di Internet.

Questa tesi ha come scopo sia l’esplorazione ed il miglioramento delle capacità di
simulazione del Network Simulator (NS), sia la valutazione delle capacità di gestione
del traffico della nuova architettura. Particolare attenzione è rivolta alla versatilità nel
definire nuovi modelli di servizio e alla possibilità di valutarne le prestazioni.

Diversi sono i risultati ottenuti: sensibili miglioramenti sono stati apportati al
simulatore introducendo un insieme di nuovi meccanismi e funzionalità che hanno
reso possibile la simulazione di modelli di servizio completi e la relativa valutazione
delle prestazioni; inoltre alcuni scenari sono stati esplorati, in particolare è stato
implementato un modello comprendente un servizio di tipo Premium per
applicazioni quali Voice over IP, comprendente i servizi del modello Olympic e
comprendente un servizio di tipo Best Effort per la compatibilità all’indietro; i
relativi generatori di traffico sono stati configurati ed i relativi parametri di qualità
sono stati monitorati.


                                             iii
TIIVISTELMÄ

Tekijän nimi               Sergio Andreozzi
Työn nimi                  Diffserv-simulaatiot NS-simulaattorilla: vaatimukset,
                           kysymykset ja ratkaisut
Työn valmistumisvuosi      2001

Diplomityö                 116 sivua, 46 kuvaa, 10 taulukkoa ja 3 liitettä

Tarkastaja                 Professori Luciano Lenzini
                           Professori Luigi Rizzo
                           Professori Jari Porras
                           M. Sc. Kari Heikkinen


Hakusanat                  DiffServ, QoS, simulaatio, Network Simulator


IP-verkoista on tulossa maailmanlaajuinen verkkotekniikka, joka on läsnä kaikkialla.
Kasvava määrä erilaisia sovellutuksia tuodaan Internet-verkkoon, joten käytössä
oleva kapasiteetti pirstaloituu koko ajan. Erilaisia organisaatioissa, kuten esim. IETF,
on tehty jatkuvaa kehitystyötä Internet-verkon palvelunlaadun parantamiseksi.
Näistä ehkä merkittävin liikenteenhallintatekniikka on Diffserv-arkkitehtuuri, jolla
mahdollistetaan skaalattavat differentioidut palvelut Internet-verkoissa.

Tämä diplomityö käyttää välineenään simulointia, työkaluna NS-simulaattori,
simuloidakseen Diffserv-arkkitehtuurin menetelmiä erilaisille sovellutuksille. Työn
pääpaino on monimuotoisten palvelumallien kehityksessä ja kyseisten mallien
parametrien simuloinnissa.

Työn empiirisen osan tuloksena on paranneltu NS-simulaattorin Diffserv-moduulia;
Moduuliin lisättiin mekanismeja, joilla voidaan paremmin toteuttaa monimuotoisten
sovellutuksien määrittelyjä. Lisäksi määriteltiin lisäparametreja, joilla sovellutusten
suorituskykyä voidaan parantaa. Tätä varten rakennettiin simulaattoriin testiverkko.
Tässä testiverkossa simulointiin palvelumallia, joka koostui korkeasta luokasta, ns.
olympiamallista ja perinteisestä Interent-liikenteestä. Korkeammassa luokassa ovat
sovellutukset kuten reaaliaikaiset äänipalvelut ja olympiamalli on suunniteltu
palvelujen differentoitiin. Tässä palvelumallissa simuloitiin ja mitattiin suorituskyky-
parametreja.




                                           iv
FOREWORD


This thesis, prepared at Lappeenranta University of Technology (Finland), is the
conclusion to a series of enriching experiences acquired throughout my University
course.


First, I would like to express my gratitude to my parents, who have given me the
opportunity to follow my natural inclinations and to have provided me with both
moral and material support.


Then I want to thank Professor Luciano Lenzini, Professor Luigi Rizzo and
Professor Jari Porras for their faith in me and their suggestions.


A particular acknowledgement is for Kari Heikkinen who led this work and for
Marie Labbe who smoothed out the English language expressions.


I really appreciated the critical comments and beneficial suggestions from Tiziana
Ferrari about the simulation results and the help from Chen-Nee Chuah for the
VoIP traffic model.


Finally, my thoughts go to those who have been really important to me in the last
years: Roberta, Rosella, Monica V., Monica M., Silvia, Elisa and, last but not least,
Gabriella.




                                                                     Sergio Andreozzi




                                           v
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AF         Assured Forwarding
ATM        Asynchronous Transfer Mode
CBQ        Class Based Queueing
DIFFSERV   Differentiated Services
DS         Differentiated Services
EF         Expedited Forwarding
IESG       Internet Engineering Steering Group
IETF       Internet Engineering Task Force
IP         Internet Protocol
IPDV       IP Packet Delay Variation
LLQ        Low Latency Queueing
MPLS       MultiProtocol Label Switching
OWD        One Way Delay
PDB        Per Domain Behaviour
PHB        Per Hop Behaviour
QOS        Quality of Service
RED        Random Early Detection
RSVP       resource ReSerVation Protocol
SCFQ       Self-Clocked Fair Queueing
SFQ        Start-time Fair Queueing
SLA        Service-Level Agreement
SLS        Service-Level Specification
TCA        Traffic Conditioning Agreement
TCP        Transmission Control Protocol
TCS        Traffic Conditioning Specifications
TOS        Type of Service
UDP        User Datagram Protocol
VOIP       Voice over IP
WFQ        Weight Fair Queueing
WRED       Weighted Random Early Detection



                                       vi
                     TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
1. TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT BEFORE DIFFSERV
 1.1 A broad view network model
 1.2 The Internet Service Provision before DiffServ
     1.2.1 The Best Effort Model
     1.2.2 Integrated Service Model
     1.2.3 IP over ATM
 1.3 Comparison among these models
2. THE DIFFSERV MODEL
 2.1 Design principles
 2.2 Differentiated Services framework
     2.2.1 Differentiated Services field definition
       2.2.1.1 Backwards compatibility issues for the IPv4 ToS field
       2.2.1.2 The DS field structure
     2.2.2 Traffic classification and conditioning
     2.2.3 Per-Hop Behaviors
       2.2.3.1 A default PHB
       2.2.3.2 Class Selector PHB’s
       2.2.3.3 Expedited Forwarding PHB
       2.2.3.4 Assured Forwarding PHB Groups
3. DIFFSERV SIMULATIONS USING NS
 3.1 The need for simulation
 3.2 Conceptual model for a DiffServ router
     3.2.1 Hierarchical view of the model
     3.2.2 Basic building blocks of a DiffServ router
 3.3 The Network Simulator (NS)
     3.3.1 NS architecture
       3.3.1.1 Network topology
       3.3.1.2 The delay model


                                         1
     3.3.2 DiffServ support
     3.3.3 DiffServ module improvements
       3.3.3.1 Router design
       3.3.3.2 Measurements and performance analysis
4. SIMULATION SCENARIOS AND RESULTS
 4.1 Scenario 1: schedulers comparison for delay and jitter sensitive traffic
 4.2 Scenario 2: the level of importance differentiation in the AF PHB group
 4.3 Scenario 3: a complete service model
5. CONCLUSIONS
 5.1 Service models simulation capabilities of the Network Simulator
 5.2 Performance parameters monitoring
 5.3 Mechanisms test beds
6. FUTURE WORK
REFERENCES
APPENDIX A – Results diagrams for scenario 1
APPENDIX B – Results diagrams for scenario 2
APPENDIX C – Results diagrams for scenario 3




                                         2
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.1    A broad view network model
Figure 2.1    DiffServ Domain
Figure 2.2    IPv4 and IPv6 headers
Figure 2.3    The original IPv4 ToS octet
Figure 2.4    DS field definition
Figure 2.5    DiffServ Traffic Conditioning Block (TCB)
Figure 3.1    DiffServ router major functional blocks
Figure 3.2    Traffic conditioning and queueing elements
Figure 3.3    An example classifier
Figure 3.4    A general meter
Figure 3.5    Variants of RED
Figure 3.6    The Node structure
Figure 3.7    The Link structure
Figure 3.8    DiffServ module UML Class Diagram
Figure 3.9    DiffServ Traffic Conditioner Block in the NS core
              router object
Figure 3.10   DiffServ Traffic Conditioner Block in the NS edge
              router object
Figure 3.11   DiffServ+ module UML Class Diagram
Figure 4.1    Scenario 1: test bed
Figure 4.2    Scenario 2: test bed
Figure 4.3    WRED parameter sets
Figure 4.4    Scenario 3: test bed
Figure A.1    Relationship between EF Service rate and average
              OWD vs. packet size for WFQ scheduler – real
              network (source [48])
Figure A.2    Relationship between EF Service rate and average
              OWD vs. packet size for WFQ scheduler –
              simulated network
Figure A.3    Impact of BE packet size on EF OWD and IPDV
              for PQ scheduler – real network (source [48])
Figure A.4    Impact of BE packet size on EF OWD and IPDV
              for PQ scheduler – simulated network
Figure A.5    Comparison of average and frequency distributed
              OWD with WFQ and PQ for different EF frame
              packet sizes – real network (source [48])
Figure A.6    Comparison of average and frequency distributed
              OWD with WFQ and PQ for different EF frame
              packet sizes – simulated network
Figure A.7    Comparison of average and frequency distributed
              IPDV with WFQ and PQ - real network (source
              [48])


                                      3
Figure A.8      Comparison of average and frequency distributed
                IPDV with WFQ and PQ – simulated network
Figure B.1      Telnet traffic aggregate performance parameters in
                absence of other AF traffic
Figure B.2      FTP traffic aggregate performance parameters in
                absence of other AF traffic
Figure B.3      HTTP traffic aggregate performance parameters in
                absence of other AF traffic
Figure B.4      Global parameters performance comparison – no
                DiffServ enabled
Figure B.5      WRED parameter set 1 (staggered)
Figure B.6      WRED parameter set 2 (staggered)
Figure B.7      WRED parameter set 3 (partially overlapped)
Figure B.8      WRED parameter set 4 (partially overlapped)
Figure B.9      WRED parameter set 5 (overlapped)
Figure B.10     WRED parameter set 6 (overlapped)
Figure B.11     Global parameters performance comparison
Figure C.1      Departure rate for n0->n466 egress interface per
                service category
Figure C.2      Departure rate for n0->n466 egress interface per
                traffic category
Figure C.3      Queue length per traffic category and MBS (only
                for VoIP)
Figure C.4      Olympic Services sub-model performance
                parameters
Figure C.5      OWD and IPDV comparison among VoIP and
                RealAudio (one monitored connection per traffic
                category)
Figure C.6      caPL and boPL per traffic category


LIST OF TABLES
Table 1.1     QoS schemes – comparison at a glance
Table 2.1     The DSCP Pools
Table 2.2     DiffServ AF codepoints table
Table 3.1     A BA classifier configuration example
Table 3.2     An MF classifier configuration example
Table 4.1     TCS for e1->core egress interface
Table 4.2     TCS for e1->core egress interface
Table 4.3     TCS for n0->n466 egress interface
Table 4.4     Numerical results
Table 4.5     TCS for n0->n466 egress interface



                                         4
INTRODUCTION


IP networks are destined to become the ubiquitous global communication
infrastructure. An increasing number of different applications are continually
conveyed by them causing a fragmentation of performance and service
requirements. Continuous efforts have been made to develop a number of new
technologies for enhancing Quality of Service capabilities. The DiffServ
Architecture is the traffic management scheme defined by IETF to provide scalable
services differentiation on the Internet.


This thesis work aims to explore and to improve the simulations capabilities of the
Network Simulator (NS), in addition the traffic management skills of that new
architecture are evaluated. The main focus is on the versatility of building complete
service models and on providing a wide range of performance parameters.


Key contributions reached during this work are: firstly, an improved simulation
module with a wider set of mechanisms, a better versatility of services definition
and an extended set of performance parameters. Secondly, valuable test beds for
mechanisms testing are set. In particular, a complete service model with a Premium
Service targeted for conversational applications like Voice over IP, an Olympic
Services sub-model targeted for relative services differentiation and a Best Effort
Service for backwards compatibility is configured, relative traffic generators are set
and performance parameters are monitored.


In Chapter 1, a comparison among the former traffic management schemes is
provided and the reasons that raised the need for a new model are pointed out.


Chapter 2 introduces the DiffServ model as defined by IETF. The whole
forwarding architecture is depicted, on the basis of standardized and draft
documents.



                                            5
Chapter 3 reviews the implementation issues of Differentiated Services. Various
suitable building blocks are recalled and simulation feasibility is checked. Several
contributes are added to the simulator to improve network modelling capabilities,
service model design and performance parameter collection.


In Chapter 4, three different scenarios are depicted. The first scenario is an attempt
to understand how the simulator properly models a real IP network DiffServ
enabled. The second scenario provides a test bed for algorithmic droppers targeted
for AF group and for TCP-based traffic, moreover the best WRED parameter
setting structure is evaluated. The third scenario aims to verify the flexibility of
building complete service models and to provide a wide set of performance
parameters.




                                          6
1. TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT BEFORE DIFFSERV


To understand the current need for services differentiation and the related issues, it
is useful to retrace the evolution of the QoS model since the Internet was born. The
basic principles which inspired the design of the TCP/IP protocol suite were that
[1]:

              1. Each distinct network needs to stand on its own and no
                  internal changes can be required to any such network to
                  connect it to the Internet.
              2. Communications should be on a best effort basis. If a
                  packet did not make it to the final destination, it should
                  shortly be retransmitted from the source.
              3. Black boxes should be used to connect the networks; these
                  have been later called gateways and routers. There should
                  be no information retained by the gateways about the
                  individual flows of packets passing through them, thereby
                  keeping them simple and avoiding complicated adaptation
                  and recovery from various failure modes.
              4. There should be no global control at the operations level

These fundamental design principles and the idea of an open-architecture
networking determined the success of the current Internet.


Since 1972, when the first email was sent, an increasing number of services has
moved to IP networks. This has determined not only a traffic increment, but mostly
a fragmentation of the network services needed to support these new applications.


The Best Effort Service, subject to unpredictable delays and data loss, does not fulfil
these needs anymore. A new model capable of delivering differentiated QoS
requirements is needed.

                                          7
A possible definition of ideal QoS provision is the activity to give guarantee that every flow
is protected from all external effects in a way that the quality always satisfies the predefined
requirements [2]. The DiffServ model represents an important step toward this goal.



1.1 A broad view network model


The End-to-End QoS provision challenge involves the whole Internet in different
ways. For instance, a required service from the end-user to the service provider
generates a set of requirements inside the network. The worthy analysis presented in
[2] helps us to better understand what the customer requirements set off.


In this analysis, the author considers the technological QoS provisioning issues in a
wider Business Model. Now follows a brief presentation:


The basic entities of this model are:
        • Service Provider: refers to both activities of customer relations and
            operation & management of the network.
        • End-User: refers to any person who is using the Internet for any purpose;
            since a person has a variety of emotions that influence the use of the
            service, it is important to consider choices not only based on technical
            facts.
        • Mechanism: refers to any piece of equipment or software that allows
            different politics of packet treatment.
        • Network: refers to the basic entity managed by the service provider and
            used to transmit information from one end-user to another.
        • Application: refers to both user applications and protocols that are not
            directly controllable by the service provider.
        • Vendors: refers to companies that supply network components to service
            providers and end-users.



                                               8
                       Figure 1.1     A broad view network model


It is worthy to analyse also the basic relationships among these entities. As displayed
in Figure 1.1, customer service is used to describe the relationship between end user
and service provider. Starting from the Service-Level Agreement (SLA) as the
formal part that describes the type of service to be provided, this relationship passes
through non technical aspects to finally reach customer satisfaction.


Network service is used to describe the relationship between applications and network
characterized by parameters that enable the network to provide the applications of
the needed resources. Then traffic handling is used to describe the relationship
between network and mechanisms and represents all the elaborations a packet
receives. With appropriate mechanisms (e.g. classification, marking, metering,
shaping, dropping) it is possible to utilize the same network resources to better fulfil
the low level services. Finally, network operation & management is the relationship
between network, mechanism and service provision. It covers issues, such as
building reasonable services based on available mechanisms, making traffic
measurements for network-planning purposes and solving fault situations.




                                           9
1.2 The Internet Service Provision before DiffServ


A brief description of the previous service models and a comparison among them
will lead us to the foundations of the emerging DiffServ Model. The basic design
principles and the implementation issues will be focused. The purpose is to
understand the historical reasons for this new service model.



1.2.1 The Best Effort Model


The basic QoS model of the Internet is called Best Effort because the network tries
to transmit as many packets as possible and as soon as possible, but does not give
any guarantees. That means that the packets are subject to data loss, data duplication
or out-of-order delivery. The TCP protocol solves these problems by assigning a
sequence number to all data transmitted in the network and requiring a positive
acknowledgment from the receiver.


Another key function of the TCP protocol is that no traffic-control action is taken
until congestion is observed (the opposite approach is congestion avoidance).
Receivers bind packet loss to congested network and control senders by returning a
window size indicating a range of acceptable sequence numbers.


A further limitation of the Best Effort Model is that packets are delivered with
unpredictable delays. This means that it cannot properly support real-time
applications, except in case of low load levels and almost empty buffers. Even under
these conditions, it is not possible to provide loss-free service or different levels of
loss ratios because of the intrinsic traffic-control mechanism. This lack of versatility
raised the need for a new QoS model.




                                          10
1.2.2 Integrated Service Model


The need for a new Internet service model able to support Integrated Services
(transport of audio, video, real-time, and classical data traffic within a single network
infrastructure) led to the birth of the IntServ WG at the end of 1993. The WG
focused on the definition of a minimal set of global requirements to change the
Internet into a robust integrated-service communications infrastructure.


The basic issues were:
   • defining the services to be provided
   • defining the interfaces between applications and network services, routers
       and subnetworks
   • developing router validation requirements which can ensure that the proper
       service is provided


The desired QoS is provided by resource reservation along the path, therefore
signalling and state maintaining at each hop is needed. The resource ReSerVation
Protocol used for signalling is RSVP [4]. Its major features include the use of “soft
state” in the routers, receiver-controlled reservation requests and the use of IP
multicast for data distribution.


The signalling and reservation of the desired QoS are needed for each flow in the
network. A flow is defined as an individual, unidirectional data stream between two
applications, and is uniquely identified by the 5-tuple (Source IP address, Source
Port, Destination IP Address, Destination Port and the Transport Protocol).


Two types of services have been implemented:
   1. Guaranteed Service [5]: traffic parameters (TSpec) using a token bucket and
       service-level parameters (RSpec) describe this strict Guaranteed Service that
       provides for firm bounds on end-to-end delay and assured bandwidth for
       traffic that conforms to the reserved specifications

                                           11
    2. Controlled Load Service [6]: traffic parameters (TSpec) using a token bucket
        describe this service for those applications that work well on unloaded nets,
        but which degrade quickly under overloaded conditions. The separation
        between pure Best Effort flows and Controlled Load flows is achieved by
        priorization


The drawbacks of this model are:
    1. the reservations in each device along the path are “soft”, which means that
        they need to be refreshed periodically; if refresh packets are lost there is a
        risk of reservation time out
    2. the need for signalling and maintaining the state of each flow in each router
        is a strong limitation to scalability


An effort to solve these problems can be found in [7], an RFC document from the
RSVP Working Group. Further efforts [8] are currently made inside the MPLS WG,
where the ReSerVation Protocol has been involved to support signalling for the
raising MPLS Model.



1.2.3 IP over ATM


ATM is the telecommunications transport technique selected for the efficient
transfer of information across the network in the Broadband Integrated-Services
Digital Network Model (B-ISDN). Efficient means that ATM should be able to
fulfill the quality of service requirements of all supported connections over a
network with a limited amount of resources. The B-ISDN model is an attempt to
set up a single unified, worldwide high-speed network. It is conceived to support all
types of existing and new emerging applications (data, voice, video and multimedia
traffic in general).




                                                12
The basic key concepts of ATM technology are:
   • Connection-oriented
   • Bandwidth reservation as a congestion avoidance mechanism
   • Fixed-size packets called cells to enable high performances
   • Wide service categories definition


Despite    the    wide    standardization      effort   within   the   International
Telecommunications Union and ATM Forum (since 1991), the B-ISDN Model has
not widely succeeded. In fact, there are only a few real demonstrations of customer
service based on end-to-end ATM connections.


The main historical reasons are:
   • the initial lack of cost-effective interfaces for copper
   • the initial lack of compatibility among network devices even if coming from
       the same vendors
   • the fact that customer equipment is usually connected to a LAN and the
       impossibility of mapping application QoS requirements on the Ethernet
       level; (the IEEE 802.1D solved this problem, but now all efforts are
       concentrated on IP networks; therefore efforts are concentrated on mapping
       IP QoS requirements over IEEE 802.1D [9])


Conversely, ATM is widely used in the Internet backbone mainly as a primary
intermediate layer between optical transmission and IP packet forwarding. Thus,
nowadays it is regarded as one of the several technologies of the network layer for
the Internet Architecture to deliver IP packets.




                                          13
1.3 Comparison among these models


An interesting comparison comes from [2]. The author defines four attributes used
to compare the service models:
   1. Fairness. This is the key attribute of the relationship between the end-user
       and the service provider. Essentially, it is related to whether customers feel
       the market is fair, i.e. customers want to be sure that everyone pays the same
       price for the same product
   2. Versatility. How the model is able to satisfy the different needs of customers
   3. Robustness. This is related to the way the network is capable of managing
       the undesirable behavior of some end-users
   4. Cost Efficiency. It is related to the ability of the model to meet the previous
       attributes at the lowest price


In the following table, the core part of the analysis is summarized. Refer to [2] for a
complete description.


Table 1.1      QoS schemes - comparison at a glance


   Model              Fairness                Versatility        Robustness           Cost Efficiency
                                              Impossible to     Weak because          Good for adaptive
                 Poor due to lack of          manage delays    TCP-based traffic        applications;
 Best Effort        robustness               and packet-loss   management runs        Poor for real-time
                                                 ratios          in customers           applications
                                                                  equipment
               It is difficult to build an
                  understanding and              Good                Good                 Limited on
   IntServ       consistent customer                                                      scalability
                          service
               Seems to be difficult to                           Very good;               Difficult in
IP over ATM    build fair services from        Very good       needs attention in         managing the
                the end-user point of                          managing statistical    network due to the
                           view                                  multiplexing         complex QoS model




                                                   14
2. THE DIFFSERV MODEL


The B-ISDN brought about the idea of services differentiation. For the reasons
explained above, IP networks were more successful than ATM networks. Inside the
INTSERV WG, an attempt to provide services differentiation was made. The
limitation of this model (scalability, flexibility in building customer services) raised
the need for a new, and in a way, complementary model.


This is evident from the first paragraph of the first official document related to
DiffServ Model [10]:


“Differentiated services enhancements to the Internet protocol are intended to enable scalable
service discrimination in the Internet without the need for per-flow state and signalling at every
hop. A variety of services may be built from a small, well-defined set of building blocks
which are deployed in network nodes.”


Hence, scalability and flexibility on building customer service are the main targets of
this QoS model. The next paragraphs focus on the design principles, the DiffServ
architecture, the building blocks of DiffServ network and a conceptual model for a
DiffServ router.



2.1 Design principles


The IESG approved the DiffServ Working Group [3] on 26 February 1998 and
since that date, lots of efforts have been made to built a framework for
Differentiated Services. The most recent overview of this framework can be found
in [11]:




                                               15
“The differentiated services framework enables quality-of-service provisioning within a network
domain by applying rules at the edges to create traffic aggregates and coupling each of these with a
specific forwarding path treatment in the domain through use of a codepoint in the IP header”


The framework tries to accomplish a list of requirements presented in [12] and
summarized as follows [2]:


    • Versatility: a wide variety of end-to-end services should be possible to realize;
        network services should be independent of applications, and they should be
        directly applicable with current           applications and with current network
        services
    • Simplicity: the overall system or parts of it should not depend on signalling for
        individual flows; only a small set of forwarding behaviours should be
        necessary
    • Cost efficiency: information about individual flows or customers should not be
        used in core nodes. Only states of aggregate streams should be used in core
        nodes


A basic design choice was to decouple the fairly well-understood behaviour in the
forwarding path from the more complex and still emerging background policy and
allocation component that configures parameters used in the forwarding path. This
aims to speed the deployment of the model in the network. Moreover, it enhances
the flexibility in building new services because once the network interior is stable, it
is possible to provide new services by the available set of forwarding behaviours and
applying traffic conditioning policies at the edge.


Another design choice was to base the architecture on forwarding behaviours and
therefore to decouple it from the control plane. This principle deals with the original
design of the Internet where the decision was made to separate the forwarding and
routing components. Even if it can lead to a non-complete network utilization (i.e. if
multiple parallel or alternate paths are available, it is not possible to balance the

                                                16
traffic load on the various links, routers and switches in the network), it provides the
simplicity required to speed the deployment of the architecture. A solution to this
drawback is currently discussed inside the MPLS WG and is named Diff-Serv-aware
MPLS Traffic Engineering [13].


It is important to remark that the DiffServ architecture provides asymmetric service
differentiation since it is related to only one direction of traffic flow [12].



2.2 Differentiated Services framework


The atomic entity defined by the framework to provide service differentiation is the
DiffServ domain, a contiguous portion of the Internet over which a consistent set of differentiated
services policies are administered in a coordinated fashion [10] (issues related to inter-domain
QoS provisioning are currently discussed in the DiffServ WG). The next figure
shows a possible scenario:




                                Figure 2.1       DiffServ Domain


Packets arriving at the boundary of a DS domain experience classification and traffic
conditioning. The purpose is to impose restrictions on the composition of the
resultant aggregates. Each packet is marked with a codepoint, and each codepoint
identifies a particular aggregate. Aggregates receive differentiated treatment inside


                                                17
the DS domain. In particular, the externally observable forwarding treatment an
aggregate stream receives in an interior node is called per-hop behaviour or PHB
(multiple codepoints can map to the same PHB). In more concrete terms, PHB
refers to the packet scheduling, queueing, policing or shaping behaviour of an
interior node and it is a basic block to build services. The other ones are traffic
conditioners and they are typically deployed in DS boundary nodes.


Generalization of the concepts of aggregate (or behaviour aggregate) and per-hop
behaviour have been introduced in [11] to meet inter-domain issues. The first one is
traffic aggregate and refers to packets which are mapped to the same PHB everywhere
within a DS domain. The second one is per-domain behaviour or PDB and describes
the edge-to-edge behaviour across a DS domain experienced from a traffic
aggregate.   This level of abstraction makes it easier to compose cross-domain
services as well as making it possible to hide the details of a network’s internals
while exposing information sufficient to enable QoS.


A particular PHB (or list of PHB’s) and traffic conditioning requirements are
associated with each PDB. This requires understanding what happens to a PHB
under aggregation. Different streams of traffic that belong to the same traffic
aggregate merge and split as they traverse the network. The PDB should describe
the invariant behaviour of these network activities.



2.2.1 Differentiated Services field definition


When a packet enters a DS domain, it experiences classification and traffic
conditioning actions and it is assigned a value called Differentiated Services
CodePoint (DSCP). Each DS node must use the DSCP to select the PHB which is
to be experienced by each packet it forwards.




                                          18
The Differentiated Services Field is made of the six most significant bits of the
former IPv4 ToS octet or the former IPv6 Traffic Class octet [14] and it encodes
the DSCP.




                          Figure 2.2     IPv4 and IPv6 headers


The two least significant bits of the IPv4 TOS octet and of the IPv6 Traffic Class
octet are not presently used by DiffServ. An experimental use for an explicit
congestion notification scheme is described in [15]. DS-compliant nodes must select
PHB’s by matching against the entire 6-bit DS field.


2.2.1.1 Backwards compatibility issues for the IPv4 ToS field


The structure of the DS field described above is incompatible with the previous
definition of the IPv4 ToS octet. In the first definition [16], two ToS sub-fields were
meaningful, the 3-bit Precedence field and the 3-bit DTR (Data, Throughput and
Reliability). The former was intended to allow different levels of importance for a
datagram, while the latter was defined for a primitive services differentiation. In the
[17] and then [18], the DTR field became a 4-bit field called TOS.




                       Figure 2.3      The original IPv4 ToS octet


                                          19
While the Precedence field is widely deployed, even if not in the exact manner
intended in [16], the TOS field has not found an effective usage.


To preserve a partial backwards compatibility with most of the deployed forwarding
treatments selected by the Precedence field, a minimum requirement on a set of
PHB’s has been described in [10]. The related codepoints are called Class Selector
Codepoints and correspond to any of the eight DSCP values equal to XXX000. A
class selector codepoint with a larger numerical value than another class selector
codepoint is said to have a higher relative order. The higher one should be
associated to a PHB that treats packets with a non-lower probability of timely
forwarding, if compared to the PHB associated to the lower one. In addition, PHB’s
selected by codepoints 11x000 must give packets a preferential forwarding treatment
by comparison to the PHB selected by codepoint 000000 to preserve the common
usage of IP Precedence values 110 and 111 for routing traffic [10].


No attempt is made to maintain backwards compatibility with the DTR/MBZ or
TOS bits of the IPv4 ToS octet.


2.2.1.2 The DS field structure


In Figure 2.4, the complete structure of the DS field is shown. The default
codepoint value 00000 is defined for the default Best Effort forwarding behaviour.
This value meets the class selector PHB requirements and therefore preserves
backwards compatibility with the current use of the 000 value for the Precedence
field in the IPv4 ToS octet.




                               Figure 2.4   DS field definition

                                            20
The DS field is capable of conveying 64 distinct codepoints. The codepoint space is
divided into three pools for the purpose of codepoint assignment and management
as showed in Table 2.1 [10]:


Table 2.1       The DSCP Pools


     Pool            Codepoint space                      Assignment Policy
        1                  XXXXX0                            Standards Action
                                                (EF, AFxy, Default, Class-Selector Codepoints)
        2                  XXXX11                        Experimental/Local Usage

        3                  XXXX01                Experimental/Local Usage/Future Standards




2.2.2 Traffic classification and conditioning


In the first chapter, we introduced the concept of Service-Level Agreement (SLA) as
the formal part that describes the type of service to be provided from a service
provider to a customer. This agreement addresses both technical (e.g. traffic
conditioning, service availability) and business aspects (e.g. pricing, contractual
rules). A Traffic Conditioning Agreement (TCA) is a sub-set of an SLA and it
addresses traffic classification and conditioning rules to be applied to a traffic stream
entering the network.


A new terminology has been introduced to describe those elements of SLA and
TCA that are addressed by DiffServ. Service-Level Specification (SLS) describes a set of
parameters and their values which together define the service offered to a traffic
stream by a DS domain. Traffic Conditioning Specification (TCS) is used to describe a
set of parameters and their values which together specify a set of classifier rules and
a traffic profile.




                                           21
Traffic classification is used to describe the activity of splitting a single incoming
traffic stream into multiple outgoing streams. The purpose is to steer packets
matching some specified rule to an element of a traffic conditioner for further
processing. The selection is based on the content of some portion of the packet
header. Two types of classifiers have been defined. The BA (Behaviour Aggregate)
Classifier classifies packets based on the DS codepoint only. The MF (Multi-Field)
classifier selects packets based on the value of a combination of one or more header
fields, such as source address, destination address, DS field, protocol ID, source
port and destination port numbers, and other information such as incoming
interface.


Traffic conditioning is used to describe the activity of ensuring that the traffic
entering the DS domain conforms to the rules specified in the TCS, in accordance
with the domain’s service provisioning policy. This activity is performed through the
following mechanisms:
   • Meters. They measure the temporal properties of the stream of packets
       selected by a classifier against a traffic profile specified in a TCS. A meter
       passes state information to other conditioning functions to trigger a
       particular action for each packet which is either in- or out-of-profile trigger
   • Markers. They set the DS field of a packet to a particular codepoint, adding
       the marked packet to a particular DS behaviour aggregate
   • Shapers. They delay some or all of the packets in a traffic stream in order to
       bring the stream into compliance with a traffic profile
   • Droppers. They discard some or all of the packets in a traffic stream in order
       to bring the stream into compliance with a traffic profile. This process is
       known as "policing" the stream.


To facilitate the definition of specific traffic conditioning functions that an
incoming traffic stream can experience, the Traffic Conditioner Block has been
introduced. It can be thought of as an entity with one input and one or more
outputs and a set of control parameters.

                                           22
                   Figure 2.5   DiffServ Traffic Conditioner Block (TCB)


Note that a TCB may not necessarily contain all four elements. It is usually located
within DS ingress and egress boundary nodes, but may also be located in nodes
within a DS domain, or within a non-DS-capable domain [12].



2.2.3 Per-Hop Behaviors


The DiffServ WG defined the per-hop behaviour (PHB) as the externally
observable forwarding treatment applied to a behaviour aggregate by a DS-
compliant node. At each network node, mapping the DSCP of any packet to a
particular PHB is the way to realize differentiated services along the packet
forwarding path.


PHB’s may be specified individually, or as a group (a single PHB is a special case of
a PHB group). A PHB group usually consists of a set of two or more PHB’s that
can only be meaningfully specified and implemented simultaneously, due to a
common constraint applying to each PHB within the group, such as a queue
servicing or queue management policy [10].


The following set of PHB’s has been defined by the DiffServ WG: Default PHB,
Class Selector PHB’s, Expedited Forwarding PHB and Assured Forwarding PHB
Groups. A brief description is presented in the next paragraphs.




                                          23
2.2.3.1 A default PHB


Each DS-compliant node must provide a default PHB and the recommended
codepoint is 000000. The Best Effort forwarding behaviour might be its externally
observable treatment.


A reasonable implementation of this PHB would be a queueing discipline that sends
packets of this aggregate whenever the output link is not required to satisfy another
PHB. A reasonable policy for constructing services would ensure that the aggregate
will never starve. This could be enforced by a mechanism in each node that
reserves some minimal resources (e.g. buffers, bandwidth) for Default behaviour
aggregates.   This permits senders that are not differentiated services-aware to
continue to use the network in the same manner as today [10].


2.2.3.2 Class Selector PHB’s


To preserve backwards compatibility with any IP precedence scheme currently in
use on the network, the XXX000 values of DSCP have been reserved. These DSCP
values are called Class Selector Codepoints and map on PHB called Class Selector
PHB’s. For this, PHB’s requirements have been defined in [10] to ensure that DS-
compliant nodes can coexist with IP Precedence-based nodes.


2.2.3.3 Expedited Forwarding PHB


The Expedited Forwarding PHB (EF PHB) [19] is intended to provide a building
block for low-delay, low-jitter and low-loss services by ensuring that the EF
aggregate is served at a certain configured rate [20]. This building block can be used
to supply robust services as the Guaranteed Service in the IntServ model was
designed.




                                         24
An intuitive definition of this PHB is given in [20]: the rate at which EF traffic is
served at a given output interface should be at least the configured rate R, over a
suitably defined interval, independent of the offered load of non-EF traffic to that
interface.


The dominant causes of delay in packet networks are fixed propagation delays (e.g.
those arising from speed-of-light delays) on wide area links and queueing delays in
switches and routers. Since propagation delays are a fixed property of the topology,
delay and jitter are minimized when queueing delays are minimized. In this context,
jitter is defined as the variation between maximum and minimum delay, while in
general it is used to describe the absolute delay variation among a consecutive pair
of packets.


The intent of the EF PHB is to provide a PHB in which suitably marked packets
usually encounter short or empty queues. Furthermore, if queues remain short
relative to the buffer space available, packet loss is also kept to a minimum.


To ensure that queues encountered by EF packets are usually short, it is necessary
to ensure that the service rate of EF packets on a given output interface exceeds
their arrival rate at that interface over long and short time intervals, independent of
the load of other (non-EF) traffic.


A node that supports the EF PHB behaviour must satisfy the formal/mathematical
definition given in [20].


Packets marked for EF PHB may be remarked at a DS domain boundary only to
other codepoints that satisfy the EF PHB. Packets marked for EF PHB’s should
not be demoted or promoted to another PHB by a DS domain.




                                          25
2.2.3.4 Assured Forwarding PHB Groups


The Assured Forwarding (AF) PHB [21] is nearly equivalent to Controlled Load
Service available in the integrated services model. It is a means to offer different
levels of forwarding assurances for IP packets crossing a DS Domain. For instance,
PHB groups can be used to differentiate the level of urgency of behaviour
aggregates (e.g. Telnet, SMPT and FTP can be assigned a greater level of urgency
than HTTP). Inside a PHB group, the single PHB’s can treat packets with different
levels of importance (e.g. when a node experiences congestion, it can drop packets
related to FTP applications more than packets related to Telnet applications).


The DiffServ WG defined four different AF PHB groups called AF classes and
having the same structure. This structure can be named AF PHB Group Type and
the four classes can be named AF PHB Group Instances of the AF type. The
packets in one AF class must be forwarded independently from the packets
belonging to another AF class. It means a DS node must not aggregate two or more
AF classes together. Moreover, a minimum amount of forwarding resources has to
be allocated to each implemented AF class.


An AF PHB Group (AFx, x=1,2,3,4) provides three levels of drop precedence level,
and therefore three levels of loss probability. At least two of these have to be
implemented. In this case, the lower loss probability has to be assigned to the lower
drop level, and the higher loss probability has to be assigned to the two remaining
drop levels.


The following notation has been defined: AFxy is the AF PHB in the group x with
the drop precedence level y. In Table 2.2, the recommended codepoints are shown.




                                         26
Table 2.2      DiffServ AF codepoints table


Drop precedence            Class 1            Class 2   Class 3   Class 4
                            (AF11)             (AF21)   (AF31)    (AF41)
        Low
                            001010             010010   011010    100010
                            (AF12)             (AF22)   (AF32)    (AF42)
      Medium
                            001100             010100   011100    100100
                            (AF13)             (AF23)   (AF33)    (AF43)
        High
                            001110             010110   011110    100110




The AF codepoint mappings recommended above do not interfere with the local
use spaces nor with the recommended Class Selector codepoints.




                                              27
3. DIFFSERV SIMULATIONS USING NS
In this chapter, the implementation issues of the DiffServ architecture are inspected
and the modelling capabilities of the NS are considered. After a proof analysis,
advantages and drawbacks are ientified and solutions are given.


The purpose is to have a valuable simulation module that enables both significant
service model simulations and performance evaluations.



3.1 The need for simulation

Formally, simulation can be defined as [22]:

“...the process of designing a model of a real system and conducting experiments with this model for
the purpose either of understanding the behaviour of the system or evaluating various strategies
(within the limits imposed by a criterion or a set of criteria) for the operation of the system”

From this definition, the primary advantages of simulations are understandable.
First of all, with simulations it is possible to duplicate the behaviours of real systems
through hardware and software. This leads to understand the sensitivities of
parameters and their best setting-up without deploying several scenarios in a real
network.


Secondly, it allows to study a problem at several different levels of abstraction. By
approaching a system at a higher level of abstraction, a better understanding of
behaviours and interactions of all the high level components within the system is
achievable. The lower level components may then be designed and subsequently
simulated for verification and performance evaluation. The entire system may be
built based upon this top-down technique and alternative solutions can be
investigated without actually physically building the systems. The drawback of this
point is that the design and implementation of simulators are almost as complex as
the systems being simulated.

                                                   28
Finally, simulators can be used as an effective means for presenting and
demonstrating concepts. This is particularly true of simulators that make intelligent
use of computer graphics and animation.


Despite the advantages presented above, it is important to remark that it is
sometimes very difficult to find correct models for the real world. For example,
extensive studies have shown that the Poisson assumption is not valid for modelling
Internet traffic [2]. In particular, the aggregate arrival process of packets is not
Poisson, but it contains a long-term correlation process that essentially changes the
characteristics of traffic process. It is said that the traffic process is self-similar. Self-
similarity in this context means that there are similar traffic variations on every time
scale from milliseconds to weeks. Even on Internet traffic it is important to notice
that there is no such thing as traffic process independent of the network resources
(e.g. TCP and congestion-control mechanism). One of the ways of combating the
aforementioned difficulty is to introduce simplifying assumptions or heuristics into
the model. These elements have to be introduced as clear hypotheses and results
have to be evaluated on their basis to avoid wrong conclusions.



3.2 Conceptual model for a DiffServ router


For the purpose of this work, it is worthy to introduce a conceptual model for
DiffServ routers as described in [23]. The logical view of a DiffServ router
architecture allows a better comprehension of how the basic building block of the
DiffServ framework can be implemented. Furthermore, the deployment of
mechanisms to implement the DiffServ building block will lead us to a better design
and implementation of the networks and scenarios on the Network Simulator.




                                             29
The presented model is suitable for both edge and core DiffServ routers. This is
because the latter one can be implemented by a subset of components needed for
the former one.



3.2.1 Hierarchical view of the model
In the conceptual model, a hierarchical organization is given. Starting from the
topmost one, we will descend through the following levels reaching the granularity
of mechanisms. In Figure 3.1, the major functional blocks of the model are
illustrated. This analysis mostly focus on the central part of the diagram where
interfaces to the links and router core are modelled.




                       Figure 3.1       DiffServ router major functional blocks



The Configuration and Management Interface is intended to monitor and to provide the
DiffServ operating parameters. Monitored parameters include statistics regarding
traffic carried at various DiffServ service levels. These statistics may be important
for accounting purposes and/or for tracking compliance to Traffic Conditioning
Specifications (TCS’s) negotiated with customers. Provisioned parameters are


                                          30
primarily the TCS parameters for Classifiers and Meters and the associated PHB
configuration parameters for Actions and Queueing elements.


The QoS Agent Module can add features for integration with other deployed QoS
models (e.g. snooping of RSVP messages may be used to learn how to classify
traffic without actually participating as a RSVP protocol peer [24]).


The routing core represents the normal routing and switching functionality, it moves
packets between interfaces according to polices outside the scope of DiffServ. This
block can be thought of as an infinite bandwidth, zero-delay backplane connecting
interfaces. Actual queueing delay and eventual packet loss behaviour related have to
be modelled inside the interface involved.


Before presenting the next block, two basic concepts are depicted. Datapath is used
to define a conceptual path taken by packets with particular characteristics through a
DiffServ router. Functional datapath elements, such as Classifiers and Meters, choose as
packets take a specific path. Functional datapath elements are the basic building
blocks of the conceptual router and represent the lowest level of the hierarchy.


Now the interfaces are introduced. Each interface has ingress and egress
functionalities. Each of these components can be expressed as one or more
datapath entities called Traffic Conditioning Block (TCB). In Figure 3.2, the logical
view of a TCB is illustrated.




                 Figure 3.2     Traffic conditioning and queueing elements




                                           31
Four QoS control functions can be deployed in a datapath of traffic crossing the
router in one direction:
   • Classification
   • Metering
   • Action (involving markers, absolute droppers counters and multiplexors)
   • Queueing/Shaping (involving algorithmic droppers, queues and schedulers)


It is not mandatory that each of these functional datapath elements are implemented
at both ingress and egress; equally multiple sets of these elements may be placed in
series and/or in parallel at ingress or at egress.


Two basic assumptions are made: the first is that the set of DiffServ functions to be
carried out on traffic in a given interface are independent of those functions on all
other interfaces; the second is that in this analysis only two-port routers are
considered.



3.2.2 Basic building blocks of a DiffServ router


The basic building blocks of a conceptual router are called functional datapaths. It is
possible to classify these blocks in four main categories: classifier elements, meter
elements, action elements and queueing elements.


Classifiers are 1:N (fan-out) devices; the packets from the input stream are sorted into
various output streams by filters which match the contents of the packet or possibly
match other attributes associated with the packet. A filter consists of a set of
conditions on the component values of a packet’s classification key.


Classifiers can be cascaded in sequence and have to be unambiguous (every possible
classification key matches at least one filter and any ambiguity between overlapping
filters is resolved by precedence).


                                            32
                                 Figure 3.3       An example classifier



Two main classifier types have been selected to steer packets. The Behaviour
Aggregate (BA) classifier uses the DSCP value encoded in the IP header, while the
Multi-Field (MF) classifier uses a set of attributes such as source and destination
addresses, source and destination ports or application type. An example of BA
classifier configuration is given in Table 3.1, while an example of MF classifier
configuration is provided in Table 3.2.

Table 3.1           A BA classifier configuration example

                                       Filter               DSCP
                                        Filter 1            101010
                                        Filter 2            111111
                                  Filter 3/no match         ******


Table 3.2           An MF classifier configuration example

     Filter           IPv4 Src Addr      IPv4 Dest Addr        TCP SrcPort   TCP DestPort
      Filter 1         172.31.8.1/32      172.31.3.X/24              X           5003
      Filter 2         172.31.8.3/32      172.31.3.X/24              X           5003
Filter 3/no match        *.*.*.*/*          *.*.*.*/*                *             *



Meters are logically 1:N (fan-out) devices; packets from the input stream are selected
against a traffic/temporal profile based on a TCS and are assigned to one of the
several conformance levels (meter’s outputs). This definition differs slightly from
that described in [12] and consequently in paragraph 2.2.2, but does not change the
function of a meter.




                                                      33
                             Figure 3.4    A general meter



A meter, according to this model, measures the rate at which packets making up a
stream of traffic pass it, compares the rate to some set of thresholds and produces
some number of potential results (two or more): a given packet is said to be
"conformant" to a level of the meter if, at the time that the packet is being
examined, the stream appears to be within the rate limit for the profile associated
with that level.


Possible mechanisms to implement a meter are Average Rate Meter, Exponential
Weighted Moving Average Meter (EWMA), Token Bucket Meter (TB), Single Rate
Three Colours Marker (srTCM) [25], Two Rate Three Colours Marker (trTCM) [26]
and Time Sliding Windows Three Colours Marker (TSWTCM) [27].


The action elements are:
   • DSCP Markers is 1:1 element which sets a codepoint in the DS field of the
       packet header
   • Absolute Dropper simply discards packets
   • Multiplexor is a M:1 (fan-in) element which merges traffic streams (the output
       could be connected to a classifier or a meter)
   • Counter is a 1:1 element which updates a counter by L and a packet counter
       by 1 every time a L-byte sized packet passes through them; it can be used to
       collect statistics for the purpose of customer billing, service verification or
       network engineering
   • Null Action is a 1:1 element which performs no action on the packet; such an
       element is useful to define when the configuration or management interface
       does not have the flexibility to omit an action element in a datapath segment


                                          34
The queueing elements perform three distinct, but related functions; they store packets,
they modulate the departure of packets belonging to various traffic streams and they
selectively discard packets. Hence, queueing elements can be decomposed in three
functional datapath elements: Queues, Schedulers and Algorithmic Droppers.


The queue element stores packets coming from one or more input and serves them
to the output. Packets are served in the same order they are received (FIFO).
Operations of removing or examining packets can be implemented, but the order
among packets belonging to the same microflow must not change. FIFO queues are
theoretically without limits on their depth. In the real world, resources are limited,
hence a limit size has to be modelled. For instance, an algorithmic dropper cascaded
to a FIFO queue implements a real queue often called Drop Tail Queue.


The Scheduler element gates the departure of each packet that arrives at one of its
inputs, based on a service discipline. This service discipline is an algorithm which
might take any of the following as its input:


   1. static parameters such as relative priority associated with each of the
       scheduler's inputs
   2. absolute token bucket parameters for maximum or minimum rates associated
       with each of the scheduler's inputs
   3. parameters, such as packet length or DSCP, associated with the packet
       currently present at its input
   4. absolute time and/or local state


Possible service disciplines fall into a number of categories including, but not
limited to, First Come First Served (FCFS), strict priority, weighted fair bandwidth
sharing (e.g. WFQ), rate-limited strict priority and rate-based.




                                          35
The Algorithmic Dropper is an element which selectively discards packets that
arrive at its input, based on a discarding algorithm. It can be modelled as a 1:1
element or as an invoking operation on a FIFO queue (e.g. to implement a Drop
Tail Queue).


For EF PHB, Drop-on-threshold or Drop-out-of-profile packets are suitable to
maintain a short queue, hence, a short queueing delay. For AF PHB, the most
widely used mechanisms are Random Early Detection (RED) [28] and Multi-level
RED family. The latter applies multiple sets of RED parameters against different
packets in the same queue. In [29] variants of RED are classified in four categories,
depicted in Figure 3.5.


                                     RED - Variants




         SAST                   SAMT                      MAMT                MAST
    Single Average         Single Average            Multiple Average    Multiple Average
   Single Threshold       Multiple Threshold        Multiple Threshold   Single Threshold
       e.g. RED              e.g. WRED              e.g. RIO-C, RIO-D



                       Figure 3.5      Variants of RED (       = MRED)


In a DiffServ Model, the use of queueing systems composed by several queueing
elements enables interesting features. For instance, the shaping of behaviour
aggregates, that can be done limiting the variation in delay or imposing a maximum
rate. Another example is the load sharing, it is realized by allowing several streams
to share a link in a semi-predictable fashion. This can be implemented through a set
of FIFO queues steered by a weighted queueing algorithm such as the WFQ
scheme. This form of queueing system tends to move delay and variation in delay
from under-used classes of traffic to heavier users, as well as managing the rate of
the traffic streams.



                                               36
The Classifier, Meter, Action, Algorithmic Dropper, Queue and Scheduler
functional datapath elements described above can be combined into Traffic
Conditioning Blocks (TCBs).


All these elements are arranged arbitrarily according to the policy being expressed,
but always in the order here. Traffic may be classified; classified traffic may be
metered; each stream of traffic identified by a combination of classifiers and meters
may have some set of actions performed on it, followed by drop algorithms; packets
of the traffic stream may ultimately be stored into a queue and then be scheduled
out to the next TCB or physical interface. It is permissible to omit elements or
include null elements of any type, or to concatenate multiple functional datapath
elements of the same type.



3.3 The Network Simulator (NS)


The prominent paradigm currently being used to implement simulators is the
ubiquitous object-oriented paradigm, in which software entities closely model their real
world counterparts. This paradigm has been successfully employed to implement a
wide variety of simulators such as NS [30].


NS is a discrete event simulator targeted at networking research, which provides
substantial support for simulation of TCP, routing, and multicast protocols over
wired and wireless, local and satellite networks.


Currently, the NS Network Simulator development is supported through DARPA
with SAMAN [31] and through NSF with CONSER [32], both in collaboration with
other researchers including ACIRI [33].




                                          37
3.3.1 NS architecture


As mentioned in the previous paragraph, NS is based on object-oriented paradigm.
This leads to a better reusability and, coupled with the open source nature, it speeds
up extensions coming from third parts.


The simulator is written in C++ and uses OTcl as a command and configuration
interface. The underlying reasons of the need for two languages (one scripted,
another compiled) are that:


   • compiled languages are suitable for efficiently manipulating bytes, packet
       headers and for algorithms implementation that run over large data sets. For
       these tasks run-time speed is important
   • scripting languages are suitable for those tasks which need to be run only
       once in a simulation, but which need to be tuned very often (e.g. topology
       configuration, setting parameters). For these tasks, a short turn-around time
       is important


NS is event-driven and four kinds of schedulers are provided. Among these, the
real-time one provides the emulation capability. It means that the simulator can be
introduced in a live network, get traffic from it and inject traffic into it.


NS is single-thread, only one event is in execution at any given time. If more events
are scheduled at the same time, they are managed in a first dispatched manner.
Neither partial execution is allowed nor preemption is supported.


Arbitrary network topologies, composed of routers, links and shared media can be
defined. A rich set of protocols such as TCP and UDP is available and various types
of applications can be simulated. Among them are FTP, Telnet, and HTTP, which
use TCP as the underlying transport protocol, and applications requiring a Constant
Bit Rate (CBR) traffic pattern, which use the UDP transport protocol. Multiple

                                            38
queueing and scheduling policies can be configured such as drop-tail, random early
detection, priority and fair queueing. Packet losses are simulated by buffer overflows
in routers, which is also the dominant way packets get lost in the Internet. There is
also support for error models other than losses through buffer overflow. The
routing model can be static or dynamic. The link state (i.e. Dijkstra’s SPF) and
distance vector (i.e. Bellman-Ford) routing algorithms are supported.


3.3.1.1 Network topology


For a better understanding of what NS can model it is necessary to look into the
topology building blocks design. Two elements are the basic entities of a network
model: nodes and links.


Nodes (Figure 3.6) contain at least the following components:
   • an address, monotonically increasing by 1 (from initial value 0) across the
       simulation namespace as nodes are created
   • a list of neighbors
   • a list of agents
   • a node type identifier
   • a routing module




                                         39
                           Figure 3.6     The Node structure


Links connect nodes, model output interfaces of a node and link characteristics.
Here a brief description of the composing elements showed in Figure 3.7 is given:


   • head_: entry point to the link, it points to the first object in the link
   • queue_: reference to the main queue element of the link. Simple links usually
       have one queue per link. Other more complex types of links may have
       multiple queue elements in the link
   • link_: a reference to the element that actually models the link, in terms of the
       delay and bandwidth characteristics
   • ttl_: reference to the element that manipulates the ttl in every packet
   • drophead_: reference to an object that is the head of a queue of elements
       that the process link drops




                            Figure 3.7     The Link structure


                                          40
3.3.1.2 The delay model


Another important design choice on which it is worthy to focus is the delay model.
In a real network, four components compose the end-to-end delay a packet
experiences:
   • processing delay: time needed to process a packet on each node of the
       network
   • transmission delay: time a node needs to put the packet on the link (packet
       size/link bandwidth)
   • propagation delay: time a packet needs to cover the link
   • queueing delay: time a packet waits in a queue to be served


All these delay elements can be modelled except for the processing delay, which is
not supported.



3.3.2 DiffServ support


DiffServ support has been added to NS on 2 November 2000. The module has
been developed by Nortel Networks, but it is no longer supported by them.
DiffServ functionalities are captured in a Queue class. Since instances of this class
are deployed in the link element (refer to paragraph 3.3.1.1.), it models the output
interface of a router. Therefore, it is possible to simulate DiffServ functionalities
deployed only in output interfaces.


A Unified Modeling Language (UML) Class Diagram here depicts the DiffServ
module design and a brief description is given:




                                         41
                                                                                        coreQ ueue

                 Queue
                                                                                        coreQ ueue()
         pk_ : PacketQueue*                                                             comma nd()
         qh_ : QueueHandler                        dsREDQueue
         unblock_on_resume : int       redq_[MAX_QUEUES] : int
         qlim_ : int                   de_drop_ : NsObject*
         blocked : int                 stats : statType
                                                                                               ed geQueu e
                                       qToDq : int
         Queue()                       numQueues_ : int                                policy : policy Classi fier
         reset()                       numPrec : int
         block()                       phb_[MAX_CP] : phbParam                         edgeQueue ()
         lenght()                      phbEntries : int                                command()
         limit()                       ecn_ : int                                      enque()
         blocked()                     link_ : LinkDelay*
         unblock()                     schedMode : int                                                       1
         enque()                       queueWeight[MAX_QUEUES] : int
         resume()                      queueMaxRate[MAX_QUEUES] : double
         recv()                        queueAvgRate[MAX_QUEUES] : double
                                                                                                                                P olicyC lassifi er
         deque()                       queueArrTime[MAX_QUEUES] : double
                                       slicecount[MAX_QUEUES] : int                                              po licy_p ool[MA X_POLI CIES] : Polic y*
                                       pktcount[MAX_QUEUES] : int                                                po licyTa ble[MA X_POLI CIES] : polic yTable Entry
                                       wirrTemp[MAX_QUEUES] : int                                                po licyTa bleSiz e : in t
                                       wirrqDone[MAX_QUEUES] : unsigned char                                     po licerT able[M AX_CP] : poli cerTab leEntr y
                                       queuesDone : int                                                          po licerT ableSi ze : i nt

                                       dsREDQueue()                                                              Po licyCl assifi er()
                                       command()                                                                 ad dPolic yEntry ()
                                       reset()                                                                   ad dPolic erEntr y()
                                       edrop()                                                                   up datePo licyRT T()
                                       enque()                                                                   ge tCBuck et()
              redQueue
                                       deque()                                                                   ma rk()
      numPrec : int                                                                                              pr intPol icyTab le()
                                       getCodePt()
      qlim : int               1..n                                                                              pr intPol icerTa ble()
                                       selectQueueToDeque()
      mredMode : mredModeType                                                                                    ge tPolic yTable Entry( )
                                       lookupPHBTable()
      q_ : PacketQueue*                                                                                          ge tPolic erTabl eEntry ()
                                       addPHBEntry()
      qParam_[MAX_PREC] : qParam                                                     DumbPolicy
                                       setNumPrec()                                                                            1..n
                                       setMREDMode()
      redQueue()
                                       printStats()                                 DumbPo licy()
      config()
                                       getStat()                                    applyM eter()                                                     SRTCMPolicy
      initREDStateVar()
                                       printPHBTable()                              applyP olicer ()
      updateREDStateVar()
                                       setSchedularMode()                                                                 Policy                      SRTCMPolicy()
      enque()
                                       addQueueWeights()                                                                                              applyMeter()
      deque()
                                       addQueueRate()                                                                                                 applyPolicer()
      getWeightedLenght()                                                            TSW2CMPolicy                     Pol icy()
                                       printWRRcount()
      getRealLenght()                                                                                                 app lyMete r()
                                       applyTSWMeter()
      setPTC()                                                                                                        app lyPoli cer()
                                                                                     TSW2CMPolicy()
      setMPS()
      calcAvg()                                                                      applyMeter()
                                                                                     applyPolicer()                                                    TRTCMPolicy

                                                                                                                                                      TRTCMPolicy()
                                                                                                                                                      applyMeter()
                                                                                                  TSW3CM Policy                                       applyPolicer()
                                                                                                                                TBPolicy

                                                                                                  TSW3CMPolicy()
                                                                                                                              TBPolicy()
                                                                                                  applyMeter()
                                                                                                                              applyMeter()
                                                                                                  applyPolicer()
                                                                                                                              applyPolicer()




                                   Figure 3.8                 DiffServ module UML Class Diagram


The dsREDQueue class models a multiple queue, each one for a class of service.
Each single queue with its congestion avoidance mechanisms is provided by the
class redQueue.


EdgeQueue and CoreQueue classes are a specialization of the dsREDQueue and
model the output interface of a router. The PolicyClassifier class is part of the first
one and provides metering and marking functionalities.


Referring to Figure 3.2, the logical structure of the TCB deployed in edge and core
router output interfaces is given:




          Figure 3.9                  DiffServ Traffic Conditioner Block in the NS core router object



                                                                               42
         Figure 3.10    DiffServ Traffic Conditioner Block in the NS edge router object


Based on the former analysis presented in this chapter, the mechanisms provided
by the DiffServ module are listed:


    • Classifier: a MF classifier based on source address and destination address
         for meter selection and a DSCP classifier for queue selection
    • Meter: TSW2CM, TSW3CM, Token Bucket, srTCM and trTCM
    • Marker: cascaded to meter
    • Queue: Drop Tail
    • Scheduler: Round Robin (RR), Weighted Round Robin (WRR), Weighted
         Interleaved Round Robin (WIRR) and Priority Queueing (PQ)
    • Algorithmic Dropper: RIO Coupled (RIO-C), RIO De-coupled (RIO-D),
         Weighted RED (WRED) and Drop-on-Threshold


Preliminary simulations have been conducted to focus on merits and shortcomings.
The result analysis is here presented, first at the designer level and second at the user
level.


At the designer level, a basic object-oriented structure is visible. Inside each new
class a higher abstraction level is desirable and achievable. Both legibility and
extensibility are poor due to a flat design. For instance, functions related to
algorithmic droppers are grouped by method instead of being hidden in a class for
each dropper type. (see dsREDq.h/cc file, redQueue:enque and redQueue:calcAvg
methods). A more elegant solution could be to define an Abstract Data Type called,


                                             43
for example, dsDropper. This class should provide public methods that a
dsREDqueue needs to manage congestion avoidance. In particular, a config method
to set dropper parameters and an enqueEvent method to ask a dropper which action
should be applied to the incoming packet.


The same considerations can be applied to schedulers (in file dsRED.h/cc) and
meters (in file dsPolicy.h/cc). In general, the information hiding is not well
implemented (e.g. struct policyTableEntry) and a better encapsulation is achievable.


A confusing use of the field packet_type in the common header of each packet has
been noticed. This field is filled from time to time with a different semantic value
depending on the deployed traffic agent. For instance, http traffic fills it with the
PT_HTTP constant, Telnet and FTP traffic fill it with the PT_TCP constant, cbr
traffic fills it with the PT_CBR constant. Hence transport protocol, application
protocol and application type are alternatively used on the same field. This is an
undesirable limitation against the need for packet classification and marking for
differentiated services purpose.


At the user level, a lack of schedulers suitable for DiffServ is the first noticed
shortcoming. In the official distribution, only PQ is eligible, especially for EF
aggregate treatment [34], hence low delay, low jitter and low loss traffic requirement.
On a SLS base, the EF aggregate has to be correctly policed to avoid the following
drawbacks:


   a. starvation of other services
   b. high queue latency


A rate limiter for PQ is provided by the module, but it is based on a departure rate
estimator. This means that if the arrival rate is greater than the departure rate, the
priority queue is always full and every packet experiences a high queueing delay.
Moreover, congestion is managed by buffer overflow. Informal simulations firstly


                                          44
pointed out a bug and secondly, after having fixed it, confirmed the hypothesis
above explained.


A better solution is to use a token bucket as an arrival rate meter, a marker for out-
of-profile traffic and a drop-out-of-profile dropper. This way, it is possible that EF
aggregate respects the traffic contract (SLS) without introducing a relevant queueing
delay in case of congestion.


Classification, marking, and metering rules definiton are not well designed. The
following example shows a set of restrictions:

0: $qE1C setMREDMode DROP
1: $qE1C addPolicyEntry [$src id] [$dst id] TokenBucket 20 200000 10000
2: $qE1C addPolicerEntry TokenBucket 20 21
3: $qE1C addPHBEntry 20 0 0
4: $qE1C addPHBEntry 21 0 1
5: $qE1C configQ 0 0 20


$qE1C identifies the edgeRouter object; on line 0, a drop-on-treshold dropper is set;

on line 1, marking and metering rules are defined: packets coming from node src
and going to node dst are marked with DSCP 20. Moreover, they are metered with
a token bucket whose parameters are 200kpbs for Committed Information Rate
(CIR) and 10.000 bytes for Maximum Burst Size (MBS); on line 2, out-of-profile
packets are marked with DSCP 21; on lines 3 and 4, there are rules for the DSCP
classifier and codepoints are mapped on a specific queue and a drop precedence
level is assigned; on line 5, a threshold parameter for the dropper is set.


In this example, several restrictions arise:
   a. it is not possible to mark traffic on a per-packet-type basis; for instance, it is
       not possible to mark Telnet traffic with a certain codepoint and HTTP traffic
       with another codepoint
   b. it is not possible to mark traffic among several source-destination nodes and
       to apply the same meter to marked traffic; therefore, it is not possible to
       define a meter for aggregate traffic



                                               45
   c. it is not possible to drop out-of-profile traffic; in fact, the deployed dropper

       is on a threshold basis, and this threshold refers to a single queue where
       packets with different precedence levels can be injected (e.g. a drop
       precedence level can be assigned to in-profile traffic and another drop
       precedence level can be assigned to out-profile traffic).


3.3.3 DiffServ module improvements


The former analysis raises the need for a partial redesign of the module to provide a
substantial set of mechanisms suitable for service models simulation. The following
changes will be applied to improve router modelling capabilities:


   • schedulers: the targets are to speed the scheduler addition by encapsulating
       the scheduler mechanism in its own class and to increase the number of
       available schedulers
   • marker and meter: the target is to enable marking on a per-packet basis and
       to decouple marking from metering
   • dropper: the target is to enable a drop out-of-profile traffic capability on a
       drop precedence level basis


Moreover, the following set of functionalities for measurement and performance
analysis will be added:
   • One-Way Delay (OWD): the target is to enable end-to-end one-way delay
       computation as defined in [35]; instantaneous, average, minimum and
       frequency distributed OWD will be provided for UDP-based traffic
   • IP Packet Delay Variation (IPDV): the target is to enable the delay variation
       computation in a destination node for packets belonging to the same micro-
       flow; the definition of IPDV is based on [36]; instantaneous, average,
       minimum and frequency distributed IPDV will be provided for UDP-based
       traffic


                                          46
• Queue length: the target is to enable queue length checking at a script
   language level; it will be provided on a per queue and per drop level
   precedence basis
• Maximum burstiness for queue 0: the target is to enable maximum enqueued
   packets checking for queue 0; this queue is typically used for priority traffic
• Departure rate on a per queue basis and on a per queue and per drop level
   precedence basis
• Received packets, transmitted packets, early dropped and late dropped
   packets on a DSCP basis, both absolute and percentage values
• TCP Goodput on a DSCP basis, instantaneous and frequency distributed
   TCP Round-Trip Time on a DSCP basis, instantaneous and frequency
   distributed TCP Windows Size on a DSCP basis: the target is to enable
   computation of performance parameters for TCP-based traffic to understand
   the level of differentiation on an aggregate level




                                      47
3.3.3.1 Router design


In the last years, several schedulers for buffer management have been proposed and
some of these are suitable for differentiated services implementation. In this section,
the first aim is to redesign the dsREDqueue class encapsulating scheduler
functionalities in a different class called dsScheduler. This class represents only an
abstract scheduler and real schedulers can be implemented by specialization. The
following UML class diagram shows the new design:

                                                                    dsREDQueue
                      Q ue ue                           redq_[MAX_QUEUES] : int
         pk_ : PacketQueue*                             QScheduler : dsScheduler*                     coreQueue
         qh_ : QueueHandler                             de_drop_ : NsObject*
         unblock_on_resume : int                        stats : statType
                                                        qToDq : int                                  coreQueue()
         qlim_ : int                                                                                 command()
         blocked : int                                  numQueues_ : int
                                                        phb_[MAX_CP] : phbParam
         Queue()                                        phbEntries : int
         reset()                                        ecn_ : int
                                                        link_ : LinkDelay*                                                      edgeQueue
         block()
         lenght()                                       phisQueueLimit[MAX_QUEUES] : int                 NumMarkRules : int
         limit()                                        PacketSize_ : Int                                MarkRulesTable[MAX_MARK_RULES] : struct tMarkRuleTable
         blocked()                                      DSCP_ : Int                                      policy : PolicyClassifier
         unblock()
         enque()                                        dsREDQueue()                                     edgeQueue()
         resume()                                       command()                                        command()
         recv()                                         reset()                                          enque()
                                                        edrop()                                          addMarkRule()
         deque()
                                                        enque()                                          mark()
                                                        deque()                                                                      1
                                                        getCodePt()
                                                        lookupPHBTable()
                                                        addPHBEntry()
                                                        setNumPrec()
                                                 1..n   setMREDMode()
                                                        printStats()                                                   PolicyClassifier
              redQueue                                  getStat()                                                                                                          SRTCMPolicy
                                                                                                         policy_pool[MAX_POLICIES] : Policy*
     numPrec : int                                      printPHBTable()                                  policyTable[MAX_POLICIES] : policyTableEntry
     qlim : int                                         setSchedularMode()                                                                                                SRTCMPolicy()     TRTCMPolicy
                                                                                                         policyTableSize : int
     qlen : int                                         addQueueWeight()                                 policerTable[MAX_CP] : policerTableEntry                         applyMeter()
     qMaxBur : int                                      addQueueRate()                                   policerTableSize : int                                           applyPolicer()   TRTCMPolicy()
     mredMode : mredModeType                            setQSize()                                                                                                                         applyMeter()
     q_ : PacketQueue*                                  FDinit()                                         PolicyClassifier()                                                                applyPolicer()
     qParam_[MAX_PREC] : qParam                                            1                             addPolicyEntry()
                                                                                                         addPolicerEntry()
     redQueue()                                                                                          mark()                                                              Policy
     config()                                                                                            printPolicyTable()                                       1..n
     initREDStateVar()                                                                                                                                                   Policy()               TBPolicy
                                                                                                         printPolicerTable()
     updateREDStateVar()                                                   1                             getPolicyTableEntry()                                           applyMeter()
     enque()                                                                                             getPolicerTableEntry()                                          applyPolicer()      TBPolicy()
     deque()                                                      dsScheduler                                                                                                                applyMeter()
     getWeightedLenght()                           queueAvgRate[MAX_QUEUES] : double                                                                                                         applyPolicer()
     getRealLenght()                               queueArrTime[MAX_QUEUES] : double
     setPTC()                                      qpAvgRate[MAX_QUEUES][MAX_PREC] : double                                                           DumbPolicy
     setMPS()                                      qpArrTime[MAX_QUEUES][MAX_PREC] : double
     calcAvg()                                     NumQueues : int                                                                                                                          TSW3CMPolicy
                                                   winLen : double                                                                                 DumbPolicy()
                                                                                                                                                   applyMeter()
                                                                                                                                                   applyPolicer()          TSW2CMPolicy    TSW3CMPolicy()
                                                   dsScheduler()                                                                                                                           applyMeter()
                   dsRR                            Reset()                                                                                                                                 applyPolicer()
                                                   EnqueEvent()                                                                                                           TSW2CMPolicy()
                                                                                                                                      d sS FQ                             applyMeter()
     d sR R( )                                     DequeEvent()
                                                   AddParam()                                                     PacketTag s : st ru ct P ac ke tTags_str uc t           applyPolicer()
     R es et ()                                                                                                   flow[MAX_ QU EU ES ] : st ru ct flow_str uc t
     E nq ue Ev en t( )                            UpdateDepartureRate()
                                                   GetDepartureRate()                                             LinkBandw id th : d ou bl e
     D eq ue Ev en t( )                                                                                           V : doubl e
     q ue ue Le n[ MA X_ QU EUES]()                applyTSWMeter()
                                                   initMeter()                                                    MaxFinish Ta g : do ub le
     q To Dq ()                                                                                                   idle : in t

                                                                                                                  dsSFQ()
                      d sW RR                                                                                     Reset()
     q ue ue Le n[ MA X_ QU EU ES ] : int                                                                         EnqueEven t( )
     q ue ue We ig ht [M AX _Q UE UE S] : in t                                                                    DequeEven t( )
     w ir rT em p[ MA X_ QU EU ES ] : int                                                                         AddParam( )
     q To Dq : i nt
                                                                                                                                         dsSCFQ
     d sW RR ()
     R es et ()                                                                                   0..1         LinkBandwidth : double
                                                                             dsLLQ                             tlabel : double
     E nq ue Ev en t( )
     D eq ue Ev en t( )                                          PFQAssignedBandwidth : double                 session[MAX_QUEUES] : struct session_struct
     A dd Pa ra m( )                                             xPFQ : dsScheduler*
                                                                 xPQ : dsPQ*                                   dsSCFQ()
                                                                                                  0..1         Reset()
                                                                 dsLLQ()                                       EnqueEvent()
                      dsWIRR                                     Reset()                                       DequeEvent()
      queueLen[MAX_QUEUES] : int                                 EnqueEvent()                                  AddParam()
      queueWeight[MAX_QUEUES] : int                              DequeEvent()
                                                                 AddParam()
      wirrTemp[MAX_QUEUES] : int                                                                                                           dsWFQ
      slicecount[MAX_QUEUES] : int                                                                0..1
                                                                       1           0..1                                     LinkBandwidth : double
      wirrqDone[MAX_QUEUES] : unsigned char                                                                                 idle : int
      qToDq : int                                                                                                           v_time : double
      queuesDone : int                                                                                                      last_vt_update : double
                                                                                                                            fs_[MAX_QUEUES] : struct flowState
      dsWIRR()                                                                                                              GPSDeparture : int
      Reset()                                                                             dsWF2Qp                           sum : double
      EnqueEvent()                                                         flow[MAX_QUEUES] : struct flow_struct            wfq_event : Event*
      DequeEvent()                                                         V : double                                       sessionDelay : double
      AddParam()                                                           lastTimeV : double
      PrintWRRcount()                                                      LinkBandwidth : double                           dsWFQ()
                                                                                                                            Reset()
                                                                           dsWF2Qp()                                        EnqueEvent()
                                            dsPQ                           Reset()                                          DequeEvent()
                                                                           EnqueEvent()                                     AddParam()
                          q ue ue sM axRate[MAX_QUEUES] : in t
                                                                           DequeEvent()                                     handle()
                          q ue ue Le n[MAX_QUEUES] : int                   AddParam()                                       scheduleWFQ()
                          d sP Q( )
                          R es et ()
                          E nq ue Ev ent()
                          D eq ue Ev ent()
                          A dd Pa ra m()




                                                 Figure 3.11                          DiffServ+ module UML Class Diagram




                                                                                                            48
The following step is the porting of schedulers coming with the module, that is RR,
WRR, WIRR and PQ. For backwards compatibility, the rate limit option in the PQ
has been preserved. The departure rate estimator is present in each class and can
also be used for statistic purposes.


Finally, new schedulers suitable for differentiated services implementation will be
added. The decision is to implement the following schedulers:. WFQ [37], WF2Q+
[38], SCFQ [39], Start-time Fair Queueing (SFQ) [40] and Low Latency Queueing
(LLQ) [41].


WFQ, also known as Packet-by-Packet Generalized Processor Sharing (PGPS), has
been the first attempt to emulate a Generalized Processor Sharing (GPS) system on
a per-packet basis. Currently, it is not considered suitable for DiffServ
implementation due to a high implementation complexity and to a weak fairness
property. In [42], it is pointed out that the difference between the amount of service
provided to each session by WFQ and the GPS is not merely one packet, as thought
first, but N/2 packets, where N is the number of sessions sharing the link. It is here
implemented for its historical importance.


WF2Q+ has been introduced to overcome the limits of WFQ. Moreover, it is less
complex than WF2Q [43] even if the delay bound, fairness and worst-case fair
properties are the same.


SCFQ was proposed as a simpler alternative to WFQ. It avoids the needs of a GPS
emulation, but as a drawback, it has a larger delay bound. SFQ was proposed to
maintain the simplicity of SCFQ, but to provide a tighter delay bound.


LLQ has been introduced by Cisco and here there is a basic implementation. It is
suitable for service models implementation that include a Premium Service for EF
aggregate and several other services that require relative differentiation. The idea is
to use a PQ scheduler to accomplish low delay, low jitter and low loss requirements


                                          49
of Premium class and to use a PFQ scheduler to accomplish link sharing, fairness
and efficiency for other services. A portion of link bandwidth is statically assigned to
PQ, but further studies could get in deep on how to give Premium excess
bandwidth to lower services.


More schedulers have been proposed in the last years (e.g. CBQ [44], LFQ [45],
FFQ [46], SPFQ [46], BPR [47] and WTP [47]) and they are mentioned as a
reference.


Decoupling of marking and metering rule definition is done adding the new command
addMarkRule. This command also provides a marking rule on a per-transport-

protocol basis and per-application-type basis. The last feature needed to add the
new field app_type_ in the common header of each packet and to update traffic
agents to fill it with the proper value. The syntax of the command is:

$edgeRouterObject addMarkRule initialCodepoint srcNode dstNode
                  transportProtocolType applicationType


SrcNode and dstNode can be a specific node or any. TransportProtocolType can be
udp, tcp, ack or any, while ApplicationType can be telnet, ftp, audio, realaudio, cbr
or any. The list of possible values can be easily extended (refer to file packet.h for
packet type list and to method edgeQueue::addMarkRule in file dsEdge.cc for
marking code). Obviously, the code of the agent which generates the traffic has to
be changed to fill packet header fields with the proper constants. Packets not
matching any rules are marked with the default codepoint (DSCP=0).


The addPolicyEntry command changes as follows: the source address and
destination address are not needed; the initial codepoint is not used for marking, but
for classification, therefore for meter selection on a DSCP basis.


Drop out-of-profile packets are implemented by modifying the drop-on-threshold
dropper. Referring to the previous example, here it is the new script configuration:


                                          50
0: $qE1C setMREDMode DROP 0
1: $qE1C addMarkRule 20 [$s1 id] [$dest1 id] udp cbr
2: $qE1C addPolicyEntry 20 TokenBucket 200000 10000
3: $qE1C addPolicerEntry TokenBucket 20 21
4: $qE1C addPHBEntry 20 0 0
5: $qE1C addPHBEntry 21 0 1
6: $qE1C configQ 0 0 20
7: $qE1C configQ 0 1 –1


On line 7, parameter –1 for queue 0 precedence level 1 means that the packets
matching have to be dropped.


3.3.3.2 Measurements and performance analysis


One-Way Delay and IP Packet Delay Variation are two important parameters for
EF PHB performance analysis. Since usually the traffic belonging to this aggregate is
carried by UDP protocol, the measurement solution is deployed in it. The new
attribute sendtime_ has been added to the packet header (refer to file packet.h,
struct hdr_cmn). The purpose is to carry in it the packet send time. This attribute

is filled by the udp agent when the sendmsg method is called (refer to udp.h/cc
files).


The computation of these parameters has been added to the LossMonitor agent
(refer to LossMonitor.h/cc files) and the following new variables can be accessed at
the script level:
flowid_              : flow id to monitor
npktsFlowid_         : number of received packets
ipdv_                : current ipdv
owd_                 : current owd
sumIpdv_             : sum of all |ipdv|
sumOwd_              : sum of all owd
minOwd_              : minimum owd

Therefore current and average owd and ipdv can be computed, moreover minimum
owd that can be used to normalize diagrams.


Even owd and ipdv frequency distribution computation was added because it
enables a better understanding of mechanisms behaviors, in particular schedulers.




                                         51
The following command enables this capability:

$LossMonitorObject FrequencyDistribution owdTick ipdvTick fileName


An object called tFD has been defined. It provides attributes and methods for data
storage and frequency distribution computation. The tick parameter is the width of
intervals    where     time      values   are   mapped.    When      the     command
FrequencyDistribution is executed, two instances of the object tFD are allocated,

one for the one-way delay parameter and another for the IP delay variation
parameter. There is no additional overhead if this feature is not enabled.


$LossMonitorObject flushFD owdFactor ipdvFactor owdThreshold ipdvThreshold


Using this command, collected data are written in two files called owdfileName and
ipdvfileName. In every file, two columns of values are provided. In the first column

the interval upper bound divided by the factor is written (normalization), while in
the second column the percentage of packets fitting that interval is written, but only
if greater than the threshold.


Other performance parameters are accessible in both $edgeRouterObject and
$coreRouterObject using the following syntax:

set   paramVar       [$edge|coreRouterObject getStat param]

where param can be:

pkts      : number of all received packets
drops     : number of all dropped packets due to buffer overflow
edrops    : number of all dropped packets due to droppers
%drops    : percentage of all dropped packets due to buffer overflow
%edrops   : percentage of all dropped packets due to droppers
pkts    x : number of received packets                       (DSCP=x)
drops   x : number of dropped packets due to buffer overflow (DSCP=x)
edrops x : number of dropped packets due to droppers         (DSCP=x)
%drops x : % of dropped packets due to buffer overflow       (DSCP=x)
%edrops x : % of dropped packets due to droppers             (DSCP=x)

Moreover, useful aggregate parameters information for TCP traffic are accessible on
a DSCP basis:

TCPcwnd     x : current window size used by the sender          (DSCP=x)


                                           52
TCPrtt   x : current RTT measured by the sender      (DSCP=x)
TCPbGoTX x : current number of transmitted bytes     (DSCP=x)
TCPbReTX x : current number of retransmitted bytes   (DSCP=x)
TCPnReTX x : current number of retransmitted packets (DSCP=x)

An important parameter that can be computed with previous collected data is the
goodput for TCP traffic. There is not a unique definition, but in this work, the
following has been used:


                                          TCPbGoTX ( x)
                   Goodput ( x) =
                                    TCPbGoTX ( x) + TCPb Re TX ( x)


x is the DSCP for which goodput is supposed to be computed. Goodput equal to 1
means, for DSCP x, that each byte has been sent only once, no retransmissions
occurred.

The following commands provide a departure rate for queue x or for queue x and
drop precedence level y:

$edge|coreRouterObject getDepartureRate x
$edge|coreRouterObject getDepartureRate x y

while the following commands provide the current number of enqueued packets for
queue x or for queue x and drop precedence level y:

$edge|coreRouterObject getQueueLen                x
$edge|coreRouterObject getVirtQueueLen            x y

and finally, the following parameters can be accessed:

$edge|coreRouterObject set MBS0_      : maximum burstiness for queue 0
$edge|coreRouterObject set DSCP_      : DSCP of last enqueued packet
$edge|coreRouterObject set packetSize_: packet size of last enqueued
                                        packet

To compute TCP RTT frequency distribution and TCP Windows Size frequency
distribution on a DSCP basis, the following commands can be used:


$edge|coreRouterObject frequencyDistribution x




                                           53
this enables data collection for both RTT and Window Size frequency distribution
for DSCP equal to x,

$edge|coreRouterObject flushFD x


while this writes RTT frequency distribution on file FDrtt_DSCPx.tr and Window
Size frequency distribution on file FDcwnd_DSCPx.tr .


A very rich set of parameters is now accessible to better understand the behaviour
of the simulated network and the level of services differentiation.


It is important to remark that these changes to the simulator allow computation of
the above parameters without the need for a post processing of a trace file.




                                          54
4. SIMULATION SCENARIOS AND RESULTS


In this chapter, the simulation capabilities of the improved module will be explored.
The first scenario is an attempt to compare the performance analysis of a real IP
DiffServ enabled network and a simulated one and, hence, to verify how much the
simulator well models a real network. The second scenario aims to explore
congestion avoidance capabilities and selective packet discard among traffic classes
belonging to the same AF PHB group. The third scenario aims to set up a complete
service model where Premium Service is targeted for conversational services while
an Olympic Services sub-model is targeted for relative data traffic differentiation
and the Best Effort Service is targeted for backwards compatibility. The focus is
more on service model implementation versatility than service model design.



4.1 Scenario 1: schedulers comparison for delay and jitter sensitive
traffic


This scenario is based on a performance analysis conducted by TF-TANT on a real
IP DiffServ-enabled network; in particular, the results coming from phase 2 of the
Differentiated Services experiments, group 1 [48], are considered.


Aims: in the TF-TANT experiments, a test bed is set up to study the behaviour of
both WFQ (SCFQ Cisco implementation) and PQ schedulers with delay and jitter
sensitive traffic. The following tests are considered:
   A. WFQ: the relationship between EF service rate and average OWD vs. packet
       size (par 5.1.2 [48])
   B. PQ: the impact of BE packet size on EF OWD and IPDV (par 5.1.3 [48])
   C. WFQ vs. PQ: the comparison of average OWD, average IPDV, OWD
       frequency distribution and IPDV frequency distribution (par 5.1.4 [48])




                                           55
Set-up: the simulated test bed in Figure 4.1 differs from the real one on the
following points:
• In the real scenario, the traffic generator and sink are connected to a switched
   LAN to reduce the synchronization error. Here, the choice is to not model the
   LAN because the simulator program runs in a stand-alone machine and a
   general system clock is available to the whole network.
• In the real scenario, the DiffServ enabled router has a Transmission queue (TX
   queue) cascaded to the queueing system; when a scheduler chooses a packet to
   send, it sends the candidate packet to this queue. In the simulated scenario, TX
   queue is not implemented because this feature is not available in the current NS
   release. Therefore, the influence of its queue length on performances cannot be
   checked.




                          Figure 4.1    Scenario 1: test bed


Test A - settings: in this test, the WFQ scheduler and two queues are configured in
the e1->core egress interface to support both EF and BE aggregates. The
hypothesis for the EF aggregate is to have traffic entering the EF queue at a
constant rate of 300 Kbps. For this reason, the EF aggregate is generated by a
unique CBR source and is policed with a token bucket meter and a dropper as
described in Table 4.1. To avoid synchronization problems, background traffic is
generated with several CBR sources whose rate is chosen from a uniform random

                                        56
distribution in the range [10 Kbps, 100Kbps], while the starting time is chosen from
a uniform random distribution in the range [0s,5s]. The BE packet size is always
1000 bytes.


Table 4.1      TCS for e1->core egress interface


   Aggregate       DSCP          Assigned             Arrival         Meter       Dropper
                   value        bandwidth           traffic rate
       EF            46            Variable,         300 Kbps      Token Bucket   Drop out of
                                depending on                       CIR 300 Kbps     profile
                                    STAR                           CBS 1 packet
       BE             0           remaining          2.3 Mbps           2          Drop on
                                                                                   threshold


In [19] a Service-To-Arrival-Ratio (STAR) is defined as:
                                    S r * l r = Ar * STAR
where Sr is the service rate expressed as a fraction of the line rate, lr is the link rate
and Ar is the EF arrival rate. The impact of STAR parameter on OWD is analyzed.


A single simulation conducted for a 50-second period is characterized by a certain
EF packets size and a certain STAR parameter according to the TF-TANT settings.
The average OWD is computed on the whole period.


Test A - results: looking at Figure A.1 and Figure A.2, performance analysis results
can be compared. The simulated network provides behavior similar to that of the
real one. Increasing the STAR parameter significantly reduces the OWD, in
particular for large packet sizes. The gain is relevant until the STAR parameter
equals 4. A difference is perceivable for STAR parameter greater than 1 and short
packets size. The simulation experiment shows a stable OWD, while the experiment
on the real network shows a raising OWD. Finally, in the simulated network, as well
as in the real one, the IPDV is not sensitive to the STAR parameter.


Test B - settings: in this test, the PQ scheduler and two queues are configured in
the e1->core egress interface to support both EF and BE aggregates. The
hypothesis for the EF aggregate is to have traffic entering the EF queue at a

                                               57
constant rate of 300 Kbps. For this reason, the EF aggregate is generated by a
unique CBR source and is policed with a token bucket meter and a dropper as
described in Table 4.2. To avoid synchronization problems, background traffic is
generated with several sources whose rate is chosen from a uniform random
distribution in the range [10 Kbps, 100Kbps], while the starting time is chosen from
a uniform random distribution in the range [0s, 5s]. BE packet size varies from 100
bytes to 1450 bytes according to the TF-TANT settings. Only the deterministic
distribution is considered because in NS, there is no availability for traffic agent
generating packets whose size is chosen from a geometric distribution.


Table 4.2      TCS for e1->core egress interface


                   DSCP          Assigned            Arrival
   Aggregate                                                         Meter       Dropper
                   value        bandwidth          traffic rate
                                                                  Token Bucket   Drop out of
       EF            46          300 Kbps           300 Kbps      CIR 300 Kbps     profile
                                                                  CBS 1 packet
       BE             0          remaining          2.3 Mbps           2          Drop on
                                                                                  threshold


A single simulation conducted for a 50-second period is characterized by a certain
EF packets size and a certain BE packet size according to the TF-TANT settings.
The average OWD and average IPDV are computed on the whole period.


Test B - results: looking at Figure A.3 and Figure A.4, performance analysis results
can be compared. The average OWD increases with BE packet size as expected, but
in the simulated network, this parameter raises less than in the real network. To
have a more faithful comparison, the OWD should be normalized to the optimal
one in both networks. About the average IPDV, the results present more
discrepancies. To better understand this parameter behavior in the simulated
network, simulations have been repeated for a wider set of BE packet size values
and a diagram is presented in Figure A.4. For 1024 bytes, the EF packet size
presents a sawtoothed behavior. More research should be dedicated to this
difference.



                                             58
Test C - settings: in this test, two queues are configured in the e1->core egress
interface to support both EF and BE aggregates. The hypothesis for the EF
aggregate is to have traffic entering the EF queue at a constant rate of 300 Kbps.
For this reason, the EF aggregate is generated by a unique CBR source and is
policed with a token bucket meter and a dropper, same as Test B (Table 4.2). To
avoid synchronization problems, the background traffic is generated with several
sources whose starting time is chosen from a uniform random distribution in the
range [0s, 5s]. Moreover, each source has a 100 Kbps rate, but the packet size varies
from 64 to 1472 bytes (64 bytes increment) for a total of 23 flows.


A single simulation conducted for a 50-second period is characterized by a certain
EF packet size and a certain scheduler according to the TF-TANT settings. The
average OWD, the average IPDV, the OWD frequency distribution and the IPDV
frequency distribution are computed on the whole period.


Test C - results: Figure A.5 and Figure A.6 compare the average OWD for
different EF packet sizes and the OWD frequency distribution for both 128 and
1518 byte EF packet size. For these parameters, the simulator well models the real
network. PQ always performs better than WFQ, even if for a small packet size the
advantage is minor. There is no overlapping for 64-byte EF packet size and this is
the main difference against the real network. The OWD frequency distribution
shows the same relative behavior, the more the EF packet size increases, the more
significant values on x axis become dense. Furthermore, the distance between higher
value of PQ and WFQ scheduler increases. As well as in the real network, in the
simulation experiment, the WFQ profile moves to higher delays faster than the PQ
profile.


In Figures A.7 and A.8, the average IPDV for different EF packet sizes and the
IPDV frequency distribution for 128 and 1518 byte EF packet sizes are shown. In
the simulation experiment, the average parameter shows a different behavior than
the same in the real network. But looking at the frequency distribution behavior, an


                                         59
important property is confirmed: PQ and WFQ in this kind of scenario give the
same performance.


Encountered difficulties and possible improvements: the first problem was to
understand how to properly model the test bed and to find the right balance
between simplification and being true to reality. Then implementing the SCFQ
scheduler and collecting performance parameters required a good understanding of
both the NS architecture and DiffServ module and the following coding.


Some trial has been done to explore the possible motivation of IPDV behaviour
with PQ scheduler (refer to Figure A.4). An attempt to create a real EF aggregate
with several sources pointed out an incorrect behaviour of token bucket with MBS
set to one packet. In some simulation, the rate of in-profile EF packets was 200
Kbps even if the token bucket was set with a CIR equal to 300 kbps. The reason
could be found in the constant parameter used in the algorithm to meter the traffic.
This parameter, usually set to 1, gives more or less sensitiveness to rate oscillation. It
is interesting to notice that in the real network where Cisco routers were deployed,
the minimum MBS parameter could be set at 8000 bytes.


Another noticed fact is that using the WFQ, 128-byte EF packets size and big
background packets size, the EF queue showed a maximum burstiness equals to 2.
Informal simulations with more active queues showed a bigger MBS, up to 6 for 5
queues. This behaviour is confirmed by the theory. Using WFQ (SCFQ
implementation), a packet entering the queue i can experience the following
maximum latency due to the scheduler:
                                    Li       Lmax
                        Latency =        +        (V − 1)       [49]
                                    ρi        r

Li is the maximum packet size of session i, Lmax is the maximum packet size among
all sessions, ρi is the allocated rate to session i, r is the total service rate and V is the
number of active sessions. Hence, queue latency due to the WFQ scheduler
increases with the number of active queues/sessions and with the packet size.


                                               60
Bigger maximum burstiness has been recorded for small EF packet size than for big
EF packet size. This does not contrast the theory because the measurement unit is
packet number and because a CBR source, for a small packet size, generates more
packets per time unit.


Future work could focus on modelling the Transmission Queue and on building a
traffic agent with packet size geometrically distributed. Moreover, simulations could
be repeated for other kinds of schedulers implemented in this thesis work.




                                         61
4.2 Scenario 2: the level of importance differentiation in the AF
PHB group


The Assured Forwarding PHB group aims to support the level of importance
differentiation among packets crossing a DS domain. MRED (Multi-level RED) is a
generic term used to describe any scheme where the drop probability for packets
with a different drop precedence needs to be calculated independently for each drop
precedence.


Aims: this scenario is targeted as a test bed for RED mechanisms evaluation in a
large-scale internet traffic where Telnet, FTP and HTTP aggregates are injected in
the same AF PHB group. The TCP protocol carries all three traffic categories and
its congestion management future is considered. WRED [50] is the selected
mechanism for admission queue policy in the AF queue because it is suitable for
TCP congestion avoidance and because it is widely deployed.


By randomly dropping packets prior to periods of high congestion, WRED tells the
packet source to decrease its transmission rate. Since the packet source is using
TCP, it will decrease its transmission rate until all the packets reach their destination,
which indicates that the congestion is cleared. WRED reduces the chances of tail
drop by selectively dropping packets when the output interface begins to show signs
of congestion. By dropping some packets early rather than waiting until the queue is
full, WRED avoids dropping large numbers of packets at once and minimizes the
chances of global synchronization. Thus, WRED allows the transmission line to be
used fully at all times. Finally, WRED allows simultaneous, but differentiated packet
dropping using packet header information (drop precedence level encoded in the
DSCP).




                                           62
The purpose is to find the best parameter set that minimizes the number of TCP
retransmissions due to packet loss and, at the same time, gives the expected level of
importance differentiation.


Set-up: the starting point of the test bed set-up is the large-scale web traffic
scenario provided as example in the current NS release (ns2.1b8a/tcl/ex/large-
scale-web-traffic.tcl). In Figure 4.2, the topology of the complete network is
depicted. 469 nodes composed of 6 routers and 463 hosts are deployed. Link
characteristics are shown except for the following nodes where described
parameters are chosen at run-time:


    • the n6-n45 nodes delay is a distributed uniform variable (10 ms to 100 ms
       range)
    • the n46-n465 nodes bandwidth is a distributed uniform variable (22 Mbit/s
       to 32 Mbit/s range)
    • the n46-n465 nodes delay is a distributed uniform variable (10 ms to 100 ms
       range)




                              Figure 4.2   Scenario 2: test bed




                                           63
Router n0 is DiffServ enabled on its outgoing interface connected to router n466
and in Table 4.3, the settings can be checked. The chosen scheduler is SFQ because
it has been the best performing during informal simulations. Assigned weights are
17 for the AF PHB and 3 for the Default PHB, which meets the recommendation
of the DiffServ WG for which a minimum amount of bandwidth should be always
available to the Default PHB.


Table 4.3       TCS for n0->n466 egress interface

 PHB        Traffic type    DSCP           Drop      Bandwidth      Meter        Dropper
                            value       precedence
                                           level
 AF11          Telnet          10            0                        2
 AF12           FTP            12            1         85 %           2          WRED
 AF13          HTTP            14            2                        2
                                                                 Token Bucket    Drop on
 Default       other           0             2         15 %      CIR 500 kbps    threshold
                                                                 CBS 10k bytes


Traffic description: concerning HTTP traffic, no changes have been made to the
provided example. The web servers are n6-n45 hosts, while the web clients are n46-
n465 hosts. The following parameters describe the HTTP traffic model:
    • number of HTTP sessions: 400
    • inter-session time: exponential distributed variable of 1 s average
    • number of page per session: constant random variable of 250 average
    • inter-page time: exponential distributed variable of 15 s average
    • page size: constant random variable of 1 (Kbyte) average
    • inter-object time: exponential distributed variable of 0.01 s average
    • object size: Pareto distributed variable of 12 (Kbytes) average and 1.2 shape


In [51], new web traffic analyses are presented and can be used to update this traffic
model. FTP traffic is generated using default values and 50 FTP connections are
established using the same web client and server nodes. Telnet traffic is generated
using the tcplib distribution (see tcplib-telnet.cc) for the inter-arrival time and 50
Telnet connections are established among the same nodes as FTP. Both FTP and
Telnet traffics are activated during the first 50 seconds of simulation. Background

                                              64
traffic is sent as CBR flow from n467 node to n468 node in a way that the Default
queue is always full.


The first simulations were targeted to understand the behaviour of each AF
aggregate without a congestion situation. Hence, for each traffic type, parameters
like throughput, TCP window size frequency distribution, TCP RTT frequency
distribution and queue length were monitored without the presence of the other
traffic types inside the AF group. The results are shown in Figures B.1, B.2 and B.3.


With further simulations, the same parameters were collected (except for queue
length) in the absence of Services Differentiation (Figure B.4).


And finally, simulations have been conducted with all the enabled DiffServ
capabilities and for several WRED parameters sets. Global result evaluation is made
comparing the following parameters: goodput, packet loss due to buffer overflow
and packet loss due to WRED mechanism, all of them collected on a DSCP basis.


WRED parameter settings: three general parameter set structures are usually
considered. They are staggered, partially overlapped and overlapped. Two different
settings are tested for each structure. The drop probability does not change and is
0.1 for DP0 (Drop Precedence level 0), 0.2 for DP1 and 0.5 for DP2. In Figure 4.3,
all parameter sets are shown.




                                          65
                                             WRED parameter set 1                                                                                                          WRED parameter set 2
                                                  (staggered)                                                                                                                   (staggered)



  drop probability




                                                                                                                drop probability
                       1                           30          50                 70               100                                           1                                   35                       65                  95100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    100
                     0,8                                                                                                           0,8
                     0,6                                                                                                           0,6
                                                   30                                                                                                                                35
                     0,4                                                                                                           0,4
                     0,2                                       50                                                                  0,2                                                                        65
                                                                                  70                                                                                                                                              95
                       0       0   10              30          50                                                                                0        0       5                  35                       65
                           0            20              40          60                 80        100                                                  0               20             40             60             80             100

                                        minimum and maximum threshold                                                                                                 minimum and maximum threshold




                                              WRED parameter set 3                                                                                                           WRED parameter set 4
                                             (partially overlapped)                                                                                                         (partially overlapped)
  drop probability




                                                                                                                                   drop probability
                       1                                 35        50             65                     100                                              1                                    40   50        60                          100
                     0,8                                                                                                                              0,8
                     0,6                                                                                                                              0,6
                                                         35                                                                                                                                    40
                     0,4                                                                                                                              0,4
                     0,2                                           50                                                                                 0,2                                           50
                                                                                  65                                                                                                                          60
                       0       0        15         30         45                                                                                          0       0             20   30        40
                           0            20               40             60                  80         100                                                    0            20             40             60             80              100

                                         minimum and maximum threshold                                                                                                     minimum and maximum threshold




                                              WRED parameter set 5                                                                                                              WRED parameter set 6
                                                  (overlapped)                                                                                                                      (overlapped)
  drop probability




                                                                                                                                   drop probability


                       1                                                     60                          100                                              1                                                                  80           100
                     0,8                                                                                                                              0,8
                     0,6                                                                                                                              0,6
                                                                             60                                                                                                                                              80
                     0,4                                                                                                                              0,4
                     0,2                                                     60                                                                       0,2                                                                    80
                                                                             60                                                                                                                                              80
                       0       0              20                                                                                                          0       0             20
                           0            20               40             60                  80         100                                                    0            20             40             60             80              100

                                         minimum and maximum threshold                                                                                                     minimum and maximum threshold




                                                                         Figure 4.3                          WRED parameter sets


For each simulation, the following parameters were also monitored:


             • Departure rate per traffic category and per aggregate: these rates are measured at the
                               n0 router egress interface
             • Instantaneous number of enqueued packets per traffic category: the AF queue in the n0
                               router egress interface is injected with Telnet, FTP and HTTP traffic; the
                               number of packets for each category in this queue is monitored
             • Number of received ack: this represents the number of ack that crosses the n0
                               router from the n466 router to the TCP senders
             • TCP Round-Trip Time Frequency Distribution on a DSCP basis
             • TCP Window Size Frequency Distribution on a DSCP basis




                                                                                                               66
Results: in Table 4.4, numerical results are shown, while in Figure B.11, graphical
global results are presented. The WRED staggered parameter set structure gives
more protection to the DP0 packets (Telnet traffic) in case of congestion. The
WRED overlapped parameter set structure gives instead the best level of
importance differentiation among the three traffic categories sharing the packet loss
in a proportional fashion.


The highest level of goodput is detected for the overlapped parameter set structure
even though differences among the whole sets are not so relevant.


Table 4.4           Numerical results
                     Parameter set   Parameter set   Parameter set   Parameter set   Parameter set   Parameter set
                          1               2               3               4               5               6
              DP0          0%             0%              0%            0.03%           2.91%           2.39%
 caPL         DP1        0.01%            0%            0.54%           1.18%           4.84%           4.40%
              DP2       25.12%          23.61%          27.45%          23.02%          20.50%          18.95%
              DP0          0%             0%              0%              0%               0%           0.03%
 boPL         DP1          0%             0%              0%              0%               0%           0.01%
              DP2          0%             0%              0%              0%             0.02%          0.09%
              DP0         0.87           0.87            0.88            0.89             0.89           0.89
Goodput       DP1         0.91           0.91            0.91            0.92             0.91           0.91
              DP2         0.78           0.79            0.78            0.81             0.83           0.83




As it is expected, simulations with only one kind of active AF traffic each time,
showed the biggest window size and the smallest RTT (Figures B.1, B.2 and B.3). In
fact, during these simulations, no packet loss was detected, enabling the TCP
senders to work with wider window sizes.


Conversely, in the simulation with disabled DiffServ capabilities, the worst RTT
have been measured for all the AF traffic categories. The following packet losses
due to buffer overflow have been recorded: 6.83% for Telnet aggregate, 4.80% for
FTP aggregate and 17.61% for HTTP aggregate. Comparing these percentages with
the percentages showed in Table 4.4, it is evident how congestion avoidance
mechanisms are effective on a giving level of importance differentiation.


It is important to remark that WRED works on a per-packet basis, therefore it
cannot provide link sharing capabilities among the three TCP protocol-based classes
of traffic.

                                                       67
4.3 Scenario 3: a complete service model


In this last scenario, a complete approach to services differentiation is done. Starting
with the design of a service model suitable for most of the current applications and
passing through the implementation, a final evaluation will be done to show both
DiffServ architecture skills and NS simulation capabilities.


Aims: this scenario is an attempt to set up a complete service model. The aims are
to check DiffServ module versatility in services definition and to provide a set of
performance parameters suitable for mechanisms selection and parameters setting.
The provided service model is just an example, the focus is more on service model
implementation than on service model design. The purpose is to show how to build
and how to measure the performances of a service model.


Set up: a complete service model including a Premium Service for conversational
traffic, an Olympic Services sub-model for relative service differentiation and a Best
Effort Service for backwards compatibility is presented.


In Figure 4.4, the topology is depicted. 771 nodes composed by 6 routers and 765
hosts are deployed. Link characteristics are shown except for the following nodes
where the described parameters are chosen at run-time:


    • the n6-n45 nodes delay is a distributed uniform variable (10 ms to 100 ms
        range)
    • the n46-n465 nodes bandwidth is a distributed uniform variable (22 Mbit/s
        to 32 Mbit/s range)
    • the n46-n465 nodes delay is a distributed uniform variable (10 ms to 100 ms
        range)




                                          68
                                  Figure 4.4         Scenario 3: test bed


Router n0 is DiffServ enabled on its outgoing interface connected to router n466
and, in Table 4.5, settings can be checked. The chosen scheduler is LLQ which
provides a priority scheduler for the Premium Service. SFQ is the selected sub-
scheduler for remains services. This choice is suggested by the need of a scheduler
with link-sharing properties, fair excess bandwidth distribution and a low level of
complexity. Moreover, informal simulations have showed that this is the best
performing among the schedulers implemented in the NS DiffServ module.


Table 4.5         TCS for n0->n466 egress interface

    Traffic                                    DSCP
                 Traffic type      PHB                    Bandwidth            Meter        Dropper
     class                                     value

                VoIP and video                                              Token Bucket    Drop out of
 Premium                            EF          46          500 Kps         CIR 500 kbps
                  telephony                                                 CBS 10k bytes     profile
                                                                                              RIO-C
                Audio and video    AF11         10                           TSW2CM           Green:
O      Gold       streaming        AF12         12                30%       CIR 600 kbps    60,110,0.02
L                                                          R                                  Yellow:
Y                                                          E                                 30,60,0.6
M                   Telnet         AF21         18         M                                  WRED
P      Silver        FTP           AF22         20         A      30%            2             30,50
I                                                          I                                  0.1,0.2
C                                                          N
                                                           I
                                                                                              WRED
      Bronze        HTTP           AF31         26         N
                                                                  30%            2             30,60
                                                           G
                                                                                                0.5
                                                                            Token Bucket    Drop out of
Best Effort          other        Default        0                10%       CIR 400 kbps      profile
                                                                               CBS 2


                                                     69
Traffic description: the selected VoIP traffic codec is ITU-T G.723.1. This codec is
targeted for telephone applications. The algorithm is based on the CELP principle
and the bit rate is 6.3 kbps (half-duplex). The VoIP traffic is modelled as an
exponential ON/OFF distribution (1.004-second ON period, 1.587-second OFF
period) and two frames (30 ms audio sample each frame) are carried in each packet
(i.e. 24+24 bytes RTP payload size). 200 VoIP connections, that are 5K-second
long, are activated in the first 200 seconds. The involved nodes are the r1-r200 as
senders and the VoIPSink as receiver. A service rate limiter policy is applied to
avoid starvation of other services. A 500 kbps CIR is set for the token bucket, this
leads to a packet loss of almost 1% that is tolerated for this kind of application. In a
real VoIP service implementation, global rate is also policied by the Call Admission
Control mechanisms.


In the Gold Service audio streaming traffic is injected. Traffic model is based on
RealAudio agent that generates ram-encoded traffic. Connections are set as the
provided example with the current NS release (ns2.1b8a/tcl/ex/realaudio/
ramodel.tcl). Parameters for the agent are :


   • packet size:     245 bytes
   • burst time:      0.05 ms
   • idle time:       1800 ms


Number of sequential flows per user, flow duration and flow rate parameters are
taken from empirical data files. The nodes involved are r1-r300 (senders) and r0
(receiver). A Time Sliding Window Two Color algorithm is deployed to measure the
arrival rate and to mark packets when the rate overcomes a certain threshold (in this
simulation, this threshold is set to 66% of the assigned bandwidth). The
differentiation is used to early drop packets with different drop probability. The
principle is that it is preferable to lose the same amount of packets on a longer
period than to lose bursts that could belong to the same connection. The quality of
the single connections should be higher, but no study has been dedicated to that.

                                          70
The selected dropper is RIO-C because it protects packets with a lower drop level
probability better than WRED [52]. In this scenario, it is desired to always drop out-
of-profile packets if there are any.


The Silver Service is targeted for Telnet and FTP traffic. A relative differentiation is
given by early dropping Telnet traffic with lower probability. FTP traffic is
generated using default values and 50 FTP connections are established among n6-
n45 nodes (senders) and n46-n95 nodes (receivers). Telnet traffic is generated using
the tcplib distribution (see tcplib-telnet.cc) for the inter-arrival time and 50 Telnet
connections are established among the same nodes of FTP. Both FTP and Telnet
traffics are activated during the first 50 seconds of simulation.


The Bronze Service is targeted for HTTP traffic. Web servers are n6-n45 hosts,
while web clients are n46-n465 hosts. The following parameters describe the traffic
model:
   • number of HTTP sessions: 400
   • inter-session time: exponential distributed variable of 1 s average
   • number of page per session: constant random variable of 250 average
   • inter-page time: exponential distributed variable of 15 s average
   • page size: constant random variable of 1 (Kbyte) average
   • inter-object time: exponential distributed variable of 0.01 s average
   • object size: pareto distributed variable of 12 (Kbytes) average and 1.2 shape


In [51], new web traffic analyses are presented and can be used to update this traffic
model. An early detection mechanism is deployed (WRED) to avoid excessive loss
of bursts and global sinchronization.


The Best Effort Service is used for packets which do not match in any other service.
A minimum bandwidth is reserved to avoid starvation in the accomplishment of




                                           71
DiffServ WG recommendations for Default PHB. The Best Effort departure rate is
limited to 400 kbps to favour other services in sharing excess bandwidth.


The monitored parameters are:
   • Maximum Burst Size for VoIP queue: this is because VoIP is a real-time
       service that needs strictly delay bound; the worst queueing delay can easily
       be checked with this parameter
   • Instantaneous number of enqueued packets per traffic category and per service
   • Packet loss percentage due to congestion avoidance (caPL) per traffic category
   • Packet loss percentage due to buffer overflow(boPL) per traffic category
   • Departure rate per traffic category and per service
   • TCP Round-Trip Time Frequency Distribution on a DSCP basis for TCP-based
       traffic
   • TCP window size on a DSCP basis for TCP-based traffic
   • Goodput on a DSCP basis for TCP-based traffic


Moreover, average and frequency distribution for OWD and IPDV are
monitored for both a single VoIP connection and a single RealAudio connection.


Results: this scenario proves that a good level of versatility has been reached and
even such complex service model has been implemented.


Looking at Figure C.1, link sharing properties and excessive bandwidth distribution
among active queues due the SFQ scheduler can be observed. Gold, Silver and
Bronze Services have an allocated bandwidth of 900 Kbps each, while the Best
Effort Service has an allocated bandwidth of 300 kbps. Since injecting RealAudio
traffic in the Gold Service does not exploit the whole bandwidth except in a range
near 5000 s, the scheduler shares excessive transmission resources to the other
services. In this scenario the Best Effort Service is bounded to 400 kbps. Therefore,



                                             72
higher services are favoured in sharing excess bandwidth. This is just a design choice
and other solutions could be taken.


In Figure C.3, instantaneous queue length per traffic category is shown. As
expected, LLQ scheduler gives the right priorization to the VoIP traffic. Premium
queue length never overcomes 10 packets and, considering the small packet size,
this fulfills expectations. When a VoIP packet enters the queue, the scheduler can be
busy, serving a packet of a low priority queue. As these packets are usually bigger
and no pre-emption can be deployed, several other VoIP packets can enter the
priority queue during service time. Therefore, the queue size is affected by the size
of the packets in other queues. A more detailed discussion is provided in Scenario 1.


In Figure C.5, the two monitored connections are compared, one VoIP and one
RealAudio. Both OWD and IPDV are strictly bounded for Premium Service,
moreover they fit the ITU G.114 recommendation that suggests maximum OWD
for IP telephony of 150 ms. In this example the VoIP connection experiences a
maximum of 80 ms OWD, while RealAudio connection experiences a maximum of
400 ms OWD. As a remark, it is important to remember that even if RealAudio is a
real-time service, it can tolerate higher OWD using buffering on the receiver side.
This can be done because of the non-interactive nature.


In Figure C.6, packet loss due to congestion avoidance mechanisms and packet loss
due to buffer overflow are shown. The first consideration is about the RealAudio
aggregate. Depending on the tolerated packet loss percentage, the assigned
bandwidth should be increased. In the Silver Service, Telnet and FTP aggregates
receive the correct level of importance differentiation in terms of packet loss and
delay (Telnet queue shorter than FTP). Among the Olympic Services, as expected,
the Bronze Service gets the worst goodput, the worst packet loss and the worst
RTT.




                                         73
Encountered difficulties and possible improvements: the traffic generator for
VoIP is missing in the current NS and some effort has made to find a suitable one.
For other traffic types, the provided example were used.


A wrong behaviour was firstly detected for RIO-C dropper. Even if correctly set,
during the congestion situation most of the RealAudio packets were dropped due to
buffer overflow instead because of the dropper. By looking into the mechanism and
its implementation, a reason was found.


RIO-C is a RED-based dropper. RED algorithm [28] computes the average queue
length of each packet arrival event as follows:
                              avgi = avgi −1 + wq (q − avgi −1 )

where q is the current queue size, wq is equal to 0.002 (in NS implementation).


In case the queue is found in idle state, the calculation is made as follows:
                                      (time − q _ time)
                                 m=
                                               s
                                 avg i = (1 − wq ) m avg i −1

m represents the number of packets that might have been transmitted by the router
during the time that the queue was idle. Therefore, time is the arrival time of the
current packet, q_time is the starting time of the queue idle status and s is defined as
the typical transmission time for a small packet.


                                                     1
In the NS DiffServ module, s is expressed as            . Here PTC means Packet Time
                                                    PTC
Constant and is computed as follows:
                                            outLinkBW
                                  PTC =
                                             8 • MPS
outLinkBW is automatically assigned with the line rate (bit per second) and MPS is
the mean packet size (has to be set by the user).



                                             74
Since the queue is served with a rate smaller than the line rate, to use the total one
brings to the wrong computation of the m parameter. In particular, it is
overestimated and the computed average queue is consequentially underestimated.


And that is why the dropper does not work properly; configured thresholds seldom
are overcome by the wrong avg, while the real queue length increases until it
generates buffer overflow.


After having changed the code in a way that allows to set outLinkBW for each
configured queue, and after having set it to the correct rate, the RIO-C dropper
worked properly.




                                         75
5. CONCLUSIONS


All through this work several issues have been taken into consideration and various
solutions have been proposed. The final results are classified into three categories:


   1. Service models simulation capabilities of the Network Simulator
   2. Performance parameters monitoring
   3. Mechanisms test beds



5.1 Service models simulation capabilities of the Network
Simulator


The proof analysis conducted in chapter 3 raised several limitations in the NS
DiffServ module and a sub-set of them have been identified and solved. The target
was to enable a good versatility of the Service Models implementation and
performances evaluation.


The following key contributions have been reached:
   • Schedulers. The scheduler mechanisms have been encapsulated in their own
       class and moved into a separate file; now a clear interface speeds the addition
       of new schedulers with only a minimal understanding of the rest of the
       module; the following new schedulers have been added: SCFQ, SFQ, LLQ,
       WFQ and WF2Q+
   • Marking and metering. These functionalities have been decoupled and the
       the possibility of marking on a per source-destination address basis, per
       transport protocol-type basis or per application-type basis has been enabled;
       once packets are marked, it is possible to meter aggregates on a per-
       codepoint basis



                                          76
   • Dropping. A Drop-out-of-profile packets dropper has been added giving the
       opportunity to allocate a rate limiter for the purpose of admission queue
       policy; this can be done coupling a token bucket meter for arrival rate
       metering, a marker for in/out-of-profile marking and a drop-out-of-profile
       packets dropper


Two relevant bugs in the NS module have been detected and fixed. The first one
was related to the wrong behavior of the rate limiter capability of the PQ scheduler.
The second one was related to the wrong behavior of the RIO-C dropper (a
description of this problem can be found in the last part of paragraph 4.2).



5.2 Performance parameters monitoring


When a new mechanism is invented and implemented, there is the need of
collecting performance parameters to understand how valuable it is. Furthermore, in
the real networks, performance parameters are also used in the Network Operation
& Management activities. For these purposes, several new parameters can be
monitored.


They can be divided in:
   • global performance parameters. They give information about performances
       on the whole packet forwarding path
   • local performance parameters. They give information about performances on
       a single node


In the first category, the chosen parameters are:
   • For UDP-based traffic
           o Average, instantaneous, minimum and frequency distributed OWD
           o Average, instantaneous, minimum and frequency distributed IPDV



                                          77
   • For TCP-based traffic
          o TCP Goodput on a DSCP basis
          o TCP Round-Trip Time on a DSCP basis, both instantaneous value
               and frequency distribution
          o TCP Window Size on a DSCP basis, both instantaneous value and
               frequency distribution


In the second category, the chosen parameters are:
   • Instantaneous and average queue length on a queue basis or on a queue and
       drop precedence level basis
   • Maximum burstiness for queue 0
   • Departure rate on a queue basis or on a queue and drop level precedence
       basis
   • Received packets, transmitted packets, dropped packets due to droppers and
       dropped packets due to buffer overflow, all on a DSCP basis and for both
       absolute and percentage values



5.3 Mechanisms test beds


Once a mechanism is implemented and a set of performance parameters is selected,
there is the need for a test bed where the mechanism behaviour can be analysed.


In this work three test beds have been set for different purposes:
   • Scenario 1. A test bed is provided for scheduler performances comparison
       with delay and jitter sensitive traffic; the topology and traffic settings come
       from experiments on a real IP network [48] and a comparative study has
       been conducted




                                            78
   • Scenario 2. A test bed for mechanisms testing with both AF PHB group and
      TCP-based traffic is presented. Three different kinds of traffic (Telnet, FTP
      and HTTP) compose the AF aggregate and resources are allocated in a way
      to create a congestion situation
   • Scenario 3. In this last test bed, a complete service model is set to meet the
      needs of the current applications; a Premium Service is set to support
      conversational applications like VoIP, an Olympic Services sub-model is set
      to support relative services differentiation and a Best Effort Service is set for
      backwards compatibility


For all three scenarios, simulations have been conducted using available
mechanisms, and performance parameters have been collected.




                                         79
6. FUTURE WORK


Many are the opportunities to continue with this work and here a brief list is given:


   • Redesigning the dropper mechanisms and policy mechanisms as has been
       done for the schedulers
   • Enabling the hierarchical scheduling
   • Integrating the new module with the MPLS module for collaborative
       simulations
   • Working on the Network Operations & Management side joining on-going
       projects related to Bandwidth Broker and to Management Information Base
       implementation
   • Adding performance parameters to measure end-to-end quality of service for
       single connections of applications like VoIP or RealAudio




                                          80
REFERENCES
[1]    A Brief History of the Internet                                          4th August 2000
       http://www.isoc.org/internet/history/brief.html
[2]    Kilkki, Kalevi       Differentiated Services for the Internet            Macmillan            1999
                                                                                Technology Series
[3]    Official DiffServ Working Group Web Site
       http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/diffserv-charter.html
[4]    RSVP Working Group Home Page
       http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/rsvp-charter.html
[5]    Specification of Guaranteed Quality of Service                           September 1997
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2212.txt
[6]    Specification of the Controlled-Load Network Element Service             September 1997
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2211.txt
[7]    RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction Extensions                               April 2001
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2961.txt
[8]    Generalized MPLS Signalling - RSVP-TE Extensions                         October 2001
       http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-mpls-generalized-rsvp-te- (work in progress)
       05.txt
[9]    Information technology - Telecommunications and information
       exchange between systems - Local and metropolitan area
       networks -Common specifications - Part 3: Media Access Control           ISO/IEC 15802-3: 1998
       (MAC) Bridges: Revision. This is a revision of ISO/IEC 10038:
       1993, 802.1j-1992 and 802.6k-1992. It incorporates P802.11c,
       P802.1p and P802.12e
[10]   Definition of the Differentiated Services Field (DS Field) December 1998
       in the IPv4 and IPv6 Headers
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2474.txt
[11]   Definition of Differentiated Services Per Domain Behaviors April 2001
       and Rules for their Specification
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3086.txt
[12]   An Architecture for Differentiated Services                              December 1998
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2475.txt
[13]   MPLS Support of Differentiated Services                                  April 2001
       http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-mpls-diff-ext-09.txt      (work in progress)
[14]   New Terminology for DiffServ                                             August 2001
       http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-diffserv-new-terms-05.txt (work in progress)
[15]   A Proposal to add Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP           January 1999
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2481.txt
[16]   INTERNET PROTOCOL                                                        September 1981
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc791.txt
[17]   Requirements for Internet Hosts - Communication Layers                   October 1989
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1122.txt
[18]   Type of Service in the Internet Protocol Suite                           July 1992
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1349.txt


                                                    81
[19]   An Expedited Forwarding PHB                                              June 1999
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2598.txt
[20]   An Expedited Forwarding PHB                                              September 2001
       draft-ietf-diffserv-rfc2598bis-02.txt                                    (work in progress)
[21]   Assured Forwarding PHB Group                                             July 1999
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2597.txt
[22]   Shannon, Robert E.      System Simulation: The Art and Science           Prentice-Hall           1975
[23]   An Informal Management Model for DiffServ Routers                        February 2001
       http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-diffserv-model-06.txt     (proposed standard)
[24]   A Framework for Integrated Services Operation over Diffserv November 2000
       Networks
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2998.txt
[25]   A Single Rate Three Color Marker                                         September 1999
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2697.txt
[26]   A Two Rate Three Color Marker                                            September 1999
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2698.txt
[27]   A Time Sliding Window Three Colour Marker (TSWTCM)                       June 2000
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2859.txt
[28]   Floyd, S.        Random Early Detection gateways for congestion IEEE/ACM                      August
       Jacobson, V.     avoidance                                      Transaction on                1993
                                                                       Networking,
                                                                       Vol. 1, No 4
[29]   Goyal, M.        Effect of number of drop precedences in Assured GLOBECOM 99 December
       et al.           Forwarding                                      Rio de Janeiro 1999
[30]   The Network Simulator (NS) – Home Page
       http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/index.html
[31]   SAMAN Project Home Page
       http://www.isi.edu/saman/index.html
[32]   CONSER Home Page
       http://www.isi.edu/conser/index.html
[33]   ACIRI Home Page
       http://www.aciri.org/
[34]   Supplemental Information for the New Definition of the EF PHB June 2001
       http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-diffserv-ef-supplemental- (work in progress)
       01.txt
[35]   A One-way Delay Metric for IPPM                                          September 1999
       http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2679.txt
[36]   IP Packet Delay Variation Metric for IPPM                                February 2001
       http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietf-ippm-ipdv-07.txt          (expired draft)
[37]   Parekh, Abhay K.        A Generalized Processor Sharing Approach IEEE/ACM                       1993
       Gallager, Robert G.     to Flow Control in Integrated Services Transactions on
                               Networks: The Single-Node Case           Networking Vol.
                                                                        1, No. 3




                                                    82
[38]   Bennett, J.C.R.      Hierarchical    Packet          Fair   Queueing IEEE/ACM             October
       Zhang, Hui           Algorithms                                      Transactions on      1997
                                                                            networking, Vol.
                                                                            5., No. 5
[39]   Golestani, S. J.     A self-clocked fair queueing scheme for Proc. IEEE                   1994
                            broadband applications                  INFOCOM’94,
                                                                    pages 636-646,
[40]   Cheng, Haichen       Start-time Fair Queueing: A scheduling Proc. SIGCOMM                 1996
       Goyal, Pawan,        algorithm for integrated services packet 1996
       Vin, Harrick M.      switching networks


[41]   Low Latency Queueing                                                  16 August 2001
       http://www.cisco.com/univercd/cc/td/doc/product/software/ios122       (Last modified)
       /122cgcr/fqos_c/fqcprt2/qcfconmg.htm#1001280
[42]   Bennett, J.C.R.      Why WFQ is not good enough for integrated                            1996
       Zhang, Hui           services networks
[43]   Bennett, J.C.R.      WF2Q: Worst-case         fair     weighted   fair Proc. IEEE        March
       Zhang, Hui           queueing                                          INFOCOM ’96,      1996
                                                                              San Francisco, CA
[44]   Floyd, S.,           Link-sharing and Resource Management IEEE/ACM                        August
       Jacobson, V          Models for Packet Networks           Trans. On Netw.,                1995
                                                                 Vol. 3 No. 4, pp.
                                                                 365-386,
[45]   Suri, S.             Leap Forward Virtual Clock                                           October
       Varghese, G.                                                                              1997
       Chandranmenon, G
[46]   Stidialis, D.        Efficient Fair Queueing Algorithms for IEEE/ACM                      April
       Varma, A.            Packet-Switched Networks               Transactions on               1998
                                                                   networking, Vol.
                                                                   6, No. 2
[47]   Dovrolis, C.         Proportional Differentiated Services: Delay SIGCOMM                  1999
       Stiliadis, D.        Differentiation and Packet Scheduling
       Ramanathan, P.
[48]   Ferrari, T.          Differentiated Services: Experiment Report, Tiziana Ferrari          May
                            Phase 2                                     Editor, v 1.1            2000
[49]   Stiliadis, D.        Design and Analysis of Frame-based Fair          SIGMETRICS          1996
       Varma, A.            Queueing: A new Traffic Scheduling               96-5/96
                            Algorithm for Packet-Switched Networks           Philadelphia, PA,
                                                                             USA
[50]   WRED specifications                                                   16 August 2001
       http://www.cisco.com/univercd/cc/td/doc/product/software/ios122       (Last Modified)
       /122cgcr/fqos_c/fqcprt3/qcfconav.htm#11086
[51]   Donelson Smith, F.   What TCP/IP Protocol Headers Can Tell Us ACM                         June
       Campos, F. H.        About the Web                            SIGMETRICS                  2001
       Jeffay, K.
       Ott, D.
[52]   Makkar, R.           Empirical Study of Buffer Management Las Vegas                       October
       Lambadaris, I.       Scheme for DiffServ Assured Forwarding Nevada                        2000
       et al.               PHB


                                               83
APPENDIX A – RESULTS DIAGRAMS FOR SCENARIO 1




Figure A.1   Relationship between EF Service rate and average OWD vs. packet size for WFQ
                          scheduler – real network (source [48])




Figure A.2   Relationship between EF Service rate and average OWD vs. packet size for WFQ
                             scheduler – simulated network




                                         84
Figure A.3    Impact of BE packet size on EF OWD and IPDV for PQ scheduler - real network
                                        (source [48])




 Figure A.4    Impact of BE packet size on EF OWD and IPDV for PQ scheduler - simulated
                                         network




                                          85
Figure A.5   Comparison of average and frequency distributed OWD with WFQ and PQ for
              different EF frame packet sizes - real network (source [48])




Figure A.6   Comparison of average and frequency distributed OWD with WFQ and PQ for
                different EF frame packet sizes – simulated network



                                       86
Figure A.7   Comparison of average and frequency distributed IPDV with WFQ and - real
                               network (source [48])




Figure A.8   Comparison of average and frequency distributed IPDV with WFQ and PQ –
                                simulated network


                                       87
APPENDIX B – RESULTS DIAGRAMS FOR SCENARIO 2




 Figure B.1   Telnet traffic aggregate performance parameters in absence of other AF traffic




 Figure B.2   FTP traffic aggregate performance parameters in absence of other AF traffic


                                           88
Figure B.3   HTTP traffic aggregate performance parameters in absence of other AF traffic




                                         89
Figure B.4   Global parameters performance comparison – no DiffServ enabled




                                  90
Figure B.5a   WRED parameter set 1 (staggered)




                    91
Figure B.5b   WRED parameter set 1 (staggered)




                    92
Figure B.6a   WRED parameter set 2 (staggered)




                    93
Figure B.6b   WRED parameter set 2 (staggered)




                    94
Figure B.7a   WRED parameter set 3 (partially overlapped)




                         95
Figure B.7b   WRED parameter set 3 (partially overlapped)




                         96
Figure B.8a   WRED parameter set 4 (partially overlapped)




                         97
Figure B.8b   WRED parameter set 4 (partially overlapped)




                         98
Figure B.9a   WRED parameter set 5 (overlapped)




                     99
Figure B.9b   WRED parameter set 5 (overlapped)




                    100
Figure B.10a   WRED parameter set 6 (overlapped)




                     101
Figure B.10b   WRED parameter set 6 (overlapped)




                     102
Figure B.11   Global parameters performance comparison




                        103
APPENDIX C – RESULTS DIAGRAMS FOR SCENARIO 3




   Figure C.1   Departure rate for n0->n466 egress interface per service category




                                     104
Figure C.2   Departure rate for n0->n466 egress interface per traffic category




                                  105
Figure C.3   Queue length per traffic category and MBS (only for VoIP)




                               106
Figure C.4a   Olympic Services sub-model performance parameters




                            107
Figure C.4b   Olympic Services sub-model performance parameters




                            108
Figure C.5   OWD and IPDV comparison among VoIP and RealAudio (one monitored
                       connection per traffic category)




                                   109
Figure C.6   caPL and boPL per traffic category




                   110
